speed

Been
sits aes
Site

nee

pe

ise:

The

Lawrence Lee Pelletier

Library

Allegheny College

WITHDRAW

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/modelsofdesirereOOOOlivi

Models of Desire

Models of Desire
René Girard and the

Psychology of Mimesis

Paisley Livingston

ithe Johns Hopkins University Press
Baltimore and London

© 1992 The Johns Hopkins University Press
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
The Johns Hopkins University Press
701 West 40th Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21211-2190
The Johns Hopkins Press Ltd., London

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Livingston, Paisley, 1951—

Models of desire : René Girard and the psychology of mimesis /
Paisley Livingston.
5 Gut
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8018-4385-5 (alk. paper)
1. Imitation. 2. Desire. 3. Imitation— Social aspects.
4. Desire—Social aspects.

BF357.L58
1992
153.8—dc20

5. Girard, René, 1923—

.

I. Title.

91-39339

Por René

se

et

© aby —
er
bo.3

oO

7"

ee:

* Rep
=n.

Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION

«

°*

ix

Xi

ONE + Approaches to Mimetic Desire
TWO

« Elements of Mimetic Desire

+

1

+

31

THREE » Patterns of Mimetic Interaction

FOUR * Mimesis and the Origin of Culture
FIVE * Desire, Violence, and Revenge

CONCLUSION
NOLES

4°

«

60

+

103

135

171

177

BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

°«

+

+

°«

189

207

vil

Acknowledgments

My thanks are due to the Centre de Recherches en Epistémologie
Appliquée (CREA) of the Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, where some
“research for this project was conducted. A first draft of some of this
material was presented to the members of a research seminar at the
CREA, whom I thank for their useful comments. My gratitude

also goes to my wife Mette Hjort, whose questions about the theory of mimetic desire were an early impetus to the writing of this
book. Richard Macksey’s support was invaluable, and I am also
grateful to Eric Halpern, of the Johns Hopkins University Press.
Joanne Allen did an excellent job of editing the manuscript, and
I thank her for making the book better. Funds from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada helped
to make my work possible. Finally, I thank René Girard for his
inspiration and unflagging support over the years. This study 1s
dedicated to him.

Introduction

René Girard is a bold thinker who has won international renown
.for his innovative and far-reaching claims. Many of his contentions amount to a headlong challenge to some of the most predominant and entrenched positions in a number of different disciplines, and in a sense there is not a single branch of the humanities
or the social sciences that is not in some way touched by the implications of his hypotheses. Not surprisingly, the result is that
Girard’s work has drawn a wide range of reactions. Some view his
theorizing as sweeping and reductive. That he is a literary critic
who has ventured into the uncertain terrain of “theory”—and
even worse, of interdisciplinary theory—has not helped to lend
academic legitimacy to the enterprise. At the same time, however,
Girard’s work enjoys a large and impressive international following. Scholars from a number of different disciplines have found his
hypotheses to be of great value and have creatively extended his
analyses in a number of directions.'
It should be noted, however, that those who have taken up

Girard’s project in fact tend to emphasize different aspects of his
work. There are, then, different species of “Girardians,” as well as
major disagreements between them on any number of important
points. For some, what is crucial is Girard’s anthropology, his theorizing about the nature and function of myth and ritual in archaic
social formations. Others focus more specifically on his theory of
the dynamics of social order and disorder, in particular on his emphasis on the role of scapegoating in creating a form of violent
unanimity in social groups. Girard’s speculations about the origin
of human culture are another point of focus.? In literary circles, he
is sometimes known as a poststructuralist critic who has proposed
a general theory of culture as well as innovative readings of a large
xd

xi

* Introduction

corpus of major literary texts, beginning with Greek drama and
moving on through the history of the European novel. Many literary scholars have found it possible to extend his insights in the
analysis of works that Girard himself has never discussed, and
Girard’s approach has also provided a basis for rethinking some of
the central concepts of aesthetics.* There are those who are particularly interested in Girard’s recent analyses of the Bible and of its
role in history.4 Finally, some scholars have been especially interested in the implications of Girard’s concept of mimetic desire and
have found it possible to apply this notion in political philosophy
and in economics.®
That Girard’s work has inspired this variety of developments 1s
in my opinion a very good thing, and the present study cannot
attempt to discuss them all in any detail. It is crucial to understand,
however, that Girard’s fundamental concept 1s mimesis and that all

of his important interpretive and explanatory claims are either directly or indirectly based on this notion. Traditionally, mimesis
has been taken to be more or less synonymous with “representation,” but in Girard’s usage the term embraces a much broader
range of phenomena. Mimesis is said to be a “mechanism” that
generates patterns of action and interaction, personality formations, beliefs, attitudes, symbolic forms, and cultural practices and

institutions. Girard insists that there is an intimate link between
mimesis and desire and that conflict and violence, as well as a num-

ber of pathological and self-defeating behavioral patterns, can be
explained in terms of this link. He claims that the failure to understand the link between mimesis and desire has been a fundamental
blind spot in the various conceptions of human agency with which
the humanities and social sciences have worked. The individual

agent is wrongly thought to desire spontaneously, that is, in a direct and immediate relation to the objects of desire. Contrary to
this view, Girard claims that human desire is mediated, or “mi-

metic.” This means that people desire “according to others,” not in
terms of their own intrinsic preferences. And in Girard’s opinion,
to fail to focus on the basically mimetic structure of human motivation 1s to miss the fundamental bases of human experience. Indeed, Girard goes so far as to claim that it is an increased mimetic

xiii - Introduction

propensity that is the primary factor behind the emergence of specifically human cultures: mimesis produces a sequence of interactions leading to what Girard calls the first “noninstinctual” consciousness, and this experience is the starting point for the sacred
beliefs and emotions held to be the bases of human societies. Moreover, a mimetic system of motivation is supposed to explain the
persistence and dynamics of certain invariant institutional forms as
well as some fundamental features of modernity. The theory of
mimesis is, then, the foundation of the “Girardian cathedral,” as

Jean-Pierre Dupuy has correctly noted.® Yet I would prefer to replace this metaphor with a more modern religious image: in the
theory of mimesis resides the cash value of Girard’s many explanatory notes.
The present study proposes a reconstruction of Girard’s discussions of mimesis. As I understand it, a reconstruction is an analysis

that aims at a clear and schematic presentation of some of the arguments that can be found in a particular body of writings and
involves both an elucidation and a reformulation of the author’s
views. In the case at hand, undertaking such a reconstruction is
not a redundant exercise. I think it fair to say that the uninitiated
reader who turns to Girard’s texts in search of a systematic presentation of the mimetic theory is likely to be disappointed, for what
Girard in fact offers are many highly insightful and far-reaching
general suggestions, as well as a number of provocative readings

and intricate analyses of a range of particular texts. For example, in
his early presentation of the mimetic theory in Mensonge romantique et vérité romanesque (1961; translated into English as Decezt,
Desire, and the Novel, 1966) Girard proceeds by means of detailed

descriptions of the characters and interactions figuring in a collection of major European novels. As a result, the nature of his more
general empirical claims is not entirely clear. Are the motivational
phenomena that he evokes meant to be accurate descriptions of the
depictions of desire and interaction in a particular corpus of literary works? If so, how is that corpus delimited? Does Girard also
want to say that these mimetic patterns are anything but fictional
and that the theory’s domain of application extends far beyond the
domain of literary representations? Girard wants to make the latter

xiv - Introduction

claim, but the extent to which it is supported by the literary evidence is not discussed in the study on the novel. Nor are the literary readings accompanied by any extensive discussion of the
various psychological theories that purport to analyze desire outside a literary context. In Girard’s next major book, La Violence et le
sacré (1972; translated, with the author’s modifications, as Violence

and the Sacred, 1977), the focus shifts to anthropological theory
and to the analysis of archaic cultures. The basic theory of mimesis,
while remaining fundamental to Girard’s entire argument—as
Eric Gans has pointed out—does not receive a lengthy development in this work. Moreover, here and in the following book, Des
choses cachées depuis la fondation du monde (1978; translated into
English as Things Hidden since the Foundation of the World, 1987),
significant parts of the articulation of the mimetic theory take the
form of a polemical discussion of the writings of Sigmund Freud
—to the exclusion of any mention of the relations between the theory of mimetic desire and the large body of pertinent work in nonFreudian psychology. The attentive reader of these and other
works by Girard finds important shifts in terminology and emphasis in the author’s various discussions of mimesis. For example,

Girard’s increasing investment in a hypothesis about the origin of
human culture—his “fundamental anthropology”—led him to
lay greater and greater emphasis on the role of a particular form of
imitation, “acquisitive mimesis,” which he distinguishes from the
mimetic desire of the earlier texts. Yet this distinction 1s less salient
in Girard’s recent book on Shakespeare.
It is fair to say that some readers’ comprehension of Girard’s
ideas about mimesis may suffer because of the essayistic style in
which they are couched. Although much is to be learned from
Girard’s brilliant interpretations of a wide range of important
cultural documents, the hard-nosed reader may question whether
there is a “theory” here at all, if by this is meant an explanatory
system having well-defined terms and an explicit argumentative
structure. Girard frequently asserts that mimetic desire functions
as a mechanism, yet he has never backed this contention by presenting anything remotely approximating a calculus, grammar, or
algorithm describing the putative mechanism’s states and transi-

xv

° Introduction

tion laws. Contemporary linguists and cognitive psychologists
would not typically deem themselves warranted to enjoy this kind
of freedom. Any claim that a type of linguistic competence or cognitive capacity has its basis in some psychological mechanism must
be supported, at the very least, by an attempt to provide a plausible
Operative model of the putative mechanism.” Although it may be
at once inappropriate and premature to apply such methodological norms in the complex domains dealt with by Girard, the fact
remains that the exposition of his basic hypothesis has suffered
from an absence of analytic rigor. As I argue in some detail in
chapter 1, there are important ambiguities in the descriptions of
the most minimal and most schematic elements of the phenomenon of mimetic desire. The result is that there is a significant degree of open-endedness in Girard’s presentation of his views concerning mimetic desire (and a very broad range of disagreement
among his interpreters). The conclusion to be drawn, I think, is
that his writings present a far-reaching and suggestive collection
of general insights and hypotheses but not a theory in any strict
sense.8 For these reasons, a more systematic reconstruction could
be worthwhile.
The reconstruction I propose is at once analytic and selective.
My first and primary goal is simply to clarify some of the basic
ideas about the role of mimesis in human experience. To that end, I
draw distinctions between Girard’s various notions, such as “acquisitive mimesis,” 0 « “mimetic desire,” “external and internal mediation,” “conflictual mimesis,” and so on, and I discuss the relations

between them. In my effort to identify what is unique in Girard’s
intuitions about desire, I have drawn on various sources in the philosophy of psychology and action theory, for I believe that this

important body of work provides concepts that are crucial to a reconstruction of the theory of mimetic desire. I have also found it
useful to relate Girard’s terms and assumptions to empirical and
theoretical work in non-Freudian psychology. Here 1s a domain in
which the specificity of Girard’s insights needs to be recognized,

for Girard has something new to say about a theme that has long
been central to psychology.
Imitation, it has been observed, served as a “simple and sov-

xvi

« In troduction

ereign” explanatory principle in a number of early psychological
theories.? When imitation was not explicitly set forth as the central
psychological concept, its place was often taken by some closely
related notion, such as suggestion, contagion, copying, sympathy,
modeling, or identification.!° Imitation is neither simple nor sovereign, however, as far as contemporary social psychologists are
concerned. They deny that imitation or any other single notion
can serve as a universal explanatory concept in the study of social
influence and interpersonal interaction. Moreover, they assume
that there are distinct types of cognitive and motivational processes at work behind what is vaguely identified as imitation; the
term, then, does not refer to a unique natural kind.
This well-warranted distrust of simple and sovereign concepts
of imitation should not, however, be allowed to obscure the fundamental importance of various imitative phenomena; nor should

we fail to recognize that an impressive amount of research on
imitation has been conducted in the recent past. A vast array of
empirical studies document the presence of imitative phenomena
in a number of domains. To evoke only a few examples, one may
point to work arguing that imitation is an indispensable part of
children’s acquisition of language.!? Various studies emphasize the
importance of imitation in the development of gender identity.}8
Others stress its role in children’s development in general.!4 A large
body of work emphasizes the role of imitation in the learning of
aggressive behavior.!5 Many studies of what is called the “Werther
effect” explore the evidence for the conclusion that an action
as important as suicide may be prompted by the imitation of a
model’s self-destruction in a televised fiction.!6 A broad range of
work focuses on the learning of imitative behavior.!’ Finally,
various studies discuss the advantages of imitation for the imitator.!8 This is but a tiny sampling of research on imitation, but it
should suffice to demonstrate that far from being an outdated
nineteenth-century psychological concept, “imitation” and related
terms continue to play a central role in contemporary psychology.
In such a context, Girard’s hypotheses about the pragmatics of imitative interaction, and more specifically, about the influence of

xvii

« L;ntrod. uction

imitation on motivation, represent a unique and significant contribution that merits a careful examination.
In what follows, I do not seek to evaluate Girard’s contributions

to literary scholarship.'9 I do not ask whether his various readings
of literary works are “correct” or “valuable” when viewed as literary “interpretations” or “appreciations” of those works. I do not
take up the question whether Girard is right in claiming that he has
understood the intentions of Shakespeare and Proust. Nor do I
discuss the question whether Girard’s readings of literature contribute to a realistic knowledge of literary history. Instead, my goal
is to discuss Girard’s readings in terms of their heuristic value. To
grasp the specific nature of this heuristic value, it is necessary to
understand that the discussion is situated in an interdisciplinary
context, a context, moreover, where the goal of literary readings is
to help build hypotheses within a nonliterary research program.
Such is the nature of Girard’s ambitions, and by critically evaluating his work in these terms, we are more faithful to him than are
those who perceive him as merely another clever literary elucidator.
The following study focuses selectively on one aspect of
Girard’s hypotheses at the expense of others. Although I do analyze the “fundamental anthropology” in some detail in chapter 4,
no effort is made there to defend all of Girard’s speculations concerning the origin and dynamics of human culture. An important
facet of Girard’s work that receives only a cursory critical discussion here is the “philosophy of history” implicit in Girard’s work, a
philosophy that I take to be of the “substantive” variety.?° In what
follows, I do make use of some of Girard’s statements about cer-

tain large-scale sociocultural changes that have characterized the
history of Western civilization. Yet Iam not in agreement with him
on several major points. In particular, I find some of his. eschatological themes quite unfounded.?! Intimately connected to
this disagreement is my stance on the theological and religious elements in Girard’s work, for the philosophy of history in question
pivots upon nothing less than a claim about the impact that a truly
divine revelation has had on the human social order. My own approach to religious phenomena can be characterized rapidly as

xviii

* Introduction

Durkheimian in the sense that I assume that explanations of such
matters should be sought exclusively at the sociological and psychological levels of description. This means that I do not need
Girard’s hypothesis that the scientific project is a “byproduct” of
the “subterranean” Revelation being wrought by the Holy Scriptures.22 My assumption is that many of Girard’s original insights
into human interaction and motivation are logically separate from
such theological claims, just as the mimetic psychology does not
depend conceptually on the genetic anthropology.
To conclude this introduction, I shall present a brief outline of

the main steps of my argument. I begin by evoking some of the
ambiguities in discussions of Girard’s concept of mimetic desire
and survey some of the major ways in which this idea has been
construed. My conclusion is that these approaches are incompatible and that none of them adequately expresses Girard’s most valuable intuitions. Turning to theoretical psychology and action
theory, I elaborate aspects of a psychological framework within
which a more adequate theory of mimetic desire can be elucidated.
I discuss the problem of identifying the role played by desire and
other motivational concepts in psychological explanations and
take up the dispute between cognitivist and conativist theories. I
criticize Girard’s misleading rhetorical claim that he reduces all
propositional attitudes to a mechanism of desire, and I demonstrate that, on the contrary, descriptions of complex relations
between desires, beliefs, and intentions are a crucial part of his
analyses.
In chapter 2 I identify the basic elements of a minimal episode
of mimetic desire. A key feature of this analysis is an emphasis on
the desiring agent’s beliefs about the model, for in the approach
proposed here, it is the desiring agent’s “tutelary beliefs” about a
model that effectively generate an imitative form of desire. In an
effort to capture the specificity of Girard’s notion, I contrast his
concept of mimetic desire to the kind of imitative process highlighted by Albert Bandura’s theory of social learning. I point out
that there are some radically different ways in which one may de-

sire “according to the other,” and thus I distinguish between imitative and emulative forms of mimetic desire, a distinction that cor-

xix

° Introduction

responds to Girard’s emphasis on the difference between external
and internal mediation. In the same context, I discuss some of the

thorny issues that surround the problem of individuating the contents, or “objects,” of attitudes of desire.

In chapter 3 I discuss ways in which my definition of a minimal
episode of mimetic desire can be extended to embrace more significant sequences of interaction. I distinguish between mimetic modeling and personal mediation and then focus on Girard’s analysis of
double mediation. Of special interest in this regard are the complex cognitive dimensions of Girard’s model, including his emphasis on the crucial function of certain forms of misrepresentation, which I relate to Alfred Mele’s recent philosophical analysis
of self-deception.
In chapter 4 I turn to Girard’s claims about the specificity of a
primary, “acquisitive” form of mimesis and argue that the latter
should not be conflated with the notion of mimetic desire. I outline Girard’s schematic hypothesis concerning the origin of human
culture and identify its key assumptions, discussing ways in which
it may be criticized and defended in future research. I analyze his
claims concerning the typical interactive scenarios of a violent crisis and its resolution, in both precultural and cultural contexts.

The key topic here is the precise manner in which the different
types of mimesis discussed by Girard may be related to the genesis
and orientation of aggressive and conflictual interactions, and
with this in view I discuss Girard’s concept of acquisitive mimesis
and its relation to the notions of motor mimicry, conflictual mimesis, and mimetic desire. I discuss, but do not pretend to resolve,

the crucial problem concerning how a nonrepresentational form
of mimesis can be thought to generate symbolism and cultural
institutions. Reference to key assumptions and issues in Emile
Durkheim’s theory of religion sets the stage for an examination of
Girard’s treatment of the question of the origin and historical revelation of a fundamental misrepresentation of social process.
In chapter 5 I focus on the central theme in all of Girard’s analyses, namely, the conditions and consequences of violence in human interaction. I contend that there should not be a necessary
link in the theory between mimetic desire and rivalry or violence. I

xx

« Introduction

also raise questions about the mechanistic nature of Girard’s explanations of sequences of violent interaction. This discussion is
focused on his assertions about the mimetic motivation of cycles
of revenge. Reference to a depiction of a cycle of revenge in an
Icelandic saga makes possible a clarification of Girard’s statements
about the mimetic dimensions of feuding, and I discuss the kinds
of cultural elements that have to be in place for a mimetic hypothesis to be plausible.
In short, what follows is a selective interpretation of Girard’s
evocative writings. I do not claim to have exhausted his many
themes and am all too aware of the fact that in relation to his
broad, substantive vision, my efforts may seem rather “pale and
bloodless.” Yet I would be quite content if the present reconstruction succeeded in demonstrating the value of some of Girard’s insights in the context of a scientific literature characterized by epistemic prudence and analytic precision.

Models of Desire

Chapter One

Approaches to
Mimetic Desire

Interpreting the Basic Intuition

In a deceptively simple and far-reaching expression, René Girard
refers to mimetic desire as le désir selon PAutre, “desire according to
the Other.”! He contrasts mimetic desire to desire selon soi, desire

that is a spontaneous and autonomous manifestation of an individual’s inherent wants or preferences. Instead of having an “immediate” relation to his or her objects of desire, the person who desires
muimetically has a “mediated” relation to them, one that takes a detour through a model. Desire, then, 1s said to be “triangular,” for

its most basic structure involves at least three terms: the agent who
desires, the object of this agent’s desire, and the agent who serves
as the “model” or “mediator” of the desire.
In spite of its apparent simplicity, this contrast between mimetic and nonmimetic types of desire raises many difficult issues,
and in what follows I shall be at pains to sort some of them out. Yet
some readers may question the necessity of such a clarification. Is
the idea of desire “according to the other” really so very complicated? After all, various literary critics have found it possible to

apply the Girardian conception of desire to literary works without
engaging in any prior clarification of its terms.” Nevertheless, what
the specific tenets of the mimetic psychology are is not, in fact, so
very obvious, and as I shall demonstrate in a moment, there are on

this score some fundamental ambiguities in Girard’s own writings
1

2 - Models of Desire

as well as in the large body of published literature that surrounds
them.
As a first example, we may evoke one way of understanding the
basic insight conveyed by the notion of mimetic desire, a way that
may seem obvious to some but that does not really stand up to
careful scrutiny. Mimetic desire is often contrasted to “romantic”
myths of the individual’s spontaneity. In keeping with this contrast, it is sometimes assumed that the mimetic theory defines the
desiring subject as a passive entity whose desiring states are fashioned automatically upon contact with an external reality, the desires of others. Yet if the notion of mimetic desire is to be plausible
at all, it must be recognized that mimetic desire involves complex
interactions between the desiring agent and external states of affairs. Individual agency is the effective locus of a spontaneous, and
in some sense selective, process, even if this process is not a matter
of fully reflective and lucid deliberation. The selectivity in question, which is inevitable in any instance of mimetic desire, has several facets. First there is the selection of the model. It should be
obvious that people cannot plausibly be thought to imitate the desires of any human being of whom they happen to be aware. There
must be a singling out of which agent is to function as a model at a
given moment. A second element of selectivity pertains to the determination of the particular states of desire that are imitated. It
should be obvious that people do not have some kind of direct access to other people’s states of desire, all or any of which would be
automatically imitated. This point is implicit in the possibility of
error and illusion: we can imitate models whom we wrongly believe to exist, just as we can adopt desires erroneously imputed to
others—two kinds of cases that play an important role in Girard’s
analyses. Advertisers who pay celebrities large sums of money to
pretend that they avidly enjoy certain products understand this
phenomenon perfectly well, for they assume that the star’s prestige
will be associated, in the minds of the potential consumers, with

the commodities, even though the star’s expression of desire may
be totally insincere. Another sort of selectivity comes into play in
those cases where the model’s desire does have an independent reality known to the imitative agent. What does it mean to say that

3 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire
one person desires “according to” or “the same thing as” someone
else, as in Girard’s remark that “mediation begets a second desire
exactly the same as [parfaitement identique a] the mediator’s” (DDN

7/21)? These notions are anything but simple, and mimetic desire
may in fact involve a selective transformation of the model’s desire.
This last type of selectivity will be discussed in detail below, where
I shall argue that it is particularly important to take it into account
when we try to evaluate some of the claims that Girard has made
about the relation between mimesis, rivalry, and aggression.
Given the selective nature of mimetic desire, in what sense can it

be said that the mimetic psychology differs fundamentally from
romantic conceptions of the individual? It is sometimes taken for
granted that the distinction hinges on assumptions about agents’
ability —or inability—to be aware of the source of their own desires. Jean-Michel Oughourlian, for example, has proposed that
romantic psychologies have two blind spots, for they do not acknowledge the role played by desire in the constitution of the self,
and they fail to understand the role that others play in the formation of desire. In the pathological forms of romantic individualism, this lack of awareness is replaced by a deluded affirmation of
the individual’s ability to desire spontaneously.* This is not, however, an adequate interpretation of the most basic and general intu-

ition behind the notion of mimetic desire. Girard explicitly refers
to cases where the agent of mimetic desire not only is acutely aware
of the sway of this desire but also understands its mediated nature. For example, according to Girard’s reading, Don Quixote has
many illusions, but he does not think he can find the right path in
life without referring to the example set by his model, Amadis
de Gaule. Don Quixote knows that his desires are imitative but

wrongly believes that it is possible and desirable for him to realize
the style of life associated with his fictional model. It is true that in
other contexts Girard insists that in some forms of mimetic desire,

the agent has no knowledge of the role of the mediator in the formation of desire. For example, he asserts that the “spontaneity”
and “freedom” of Dostoevsky’s underground man are a myth because the agent does not understand the influence that the others,
such as the insolent officer and Zerkov, have on his desires (DDN

4. - Models of Desire

256—59/289—92). This is an important point, and I shall return
below (especially in chapter 4) to the issue of the constraints on a
mimetic agent’s self-understanding. I shall argue that epistemic
constraints do not provide an adequate general characterization
of mimetic desire and are not as simple and straightforward as
Oughourlian’s formulation suggests. Such phenomena as selfdeception and distorted and incomplete self-concepts, I contend,
are not the defining characteristics of mimetic desire.
What, then, is the central insight of the mimetic psychology if it
is not a matter of a critique of myths of spontaneity and self-awareness? The fact is that there are many different ways of developing
the notion of mimetic desire, each of which amounts to a specifica-

tion of the underlying dispositions that may be attributed to
agents when we say that they desire “according to the other.” As
these ambiguities surrounding mimetic desire have not been obvious to everyone, it may be useful to evoke some of the different
approaches that exist before I move on to propose my own reconstruction of the concept. In a sense, the interpretations to be
surveyed all try to respond to a single question: What does the
imitative agent really want? In other words, what is the implicit
structure and essential orientation of the mimetic system of motivation? Some of the answers that have been proposed are tendencies within Girard’s own writings, while others are more or less
faithful extrapolations from them.

The Idolatrous Animal

Charles Baudelaire expressed a key intuition when he wrote:
“C’est toujours Panimal adorateur, se trompant d’idole.”> Following this approach, the real goal of mimetic subjects, the secret reason for their witting and unwitting erecting of models, masters,
and mediators above themselves, is a persistent quest for transcendence. Humanity’s sense of finitude, mortality, and imperfection,
its uneasy position between what Blaise Pascal called the “two infinities,” is the existential basis of a universal desire for salvation,

the perverse expression of which is the idolatry of mimetic desire.

5 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

With a slight change of emphasis, the same interpretation may be
understood as saying that what the mimetic agent desires is the
Being of the Other, wrongly imagined to be superior. If this is the
case, it 1s clear that the theory hardly leaves the mimetic subject’s
desire indeterminate; on the contrary, it is essentially determinate
because characterized by a profoundly religious essence in one version and by a basic ontological or metaphysical preoccupation in
another.®
Certain of Girard’s own formulations support this line of interpretation. The epigraph to Mensonge romantique et vérité romanesque
is a citation from Max Scheler to the effect that human beings must
have either a god or an idol, and throughout the book, the terms

“metaphysical desire” and “mimetic desire” are used interchangeably. We read here that the mimetic subject suffers from an “ontological sickness” and seeks a remedy in futile attempts to acquire
the “being” of the “Other” (the capitalization, which echoes JeanPaul Sartre’s usage, goes unexplained in the 196] text and is subsequently abandoned). The desire for transcendence is presented as a
universal fact of human experience: in the absence of a “vertical
transcendence,” there is the world of a “deviated transcendence,”

where men become gods for each other. A similar emphasis on the
mimetic agent’s quest for “being” reappears in the discussion of
mimesis at the center of La Violence et le sacré: here as well the mimetic subject is said to “lack being.” This is what leads people to
imitate the desires of a model, for the model is someone who seems

to have a plenitude of being (VS 146/204). Should we conclude,
then, that an essential desire for “transcendence” and “being” is the

fundamental orientation of the mimetic agent? As we will see below, these terms hardiy exhaust Girard’s intuitions.

The Uncertain Subject

The key idea here is that the agent suffers from an essential indeterminacy or lack, and the attempt to put an end to this lack is the
guiding motive. In one version, a firm sense of personal identity is
the real goal of the mimetic subject, the consistent object of the

6 - Models of Desire

agent’s various relations to the model, be this model real or imaginary. This subject’s essential problem is that of coming up with an
answer to the question, “Who am I?” As no solution may be had by
peering into the abyss of solitude, it is imagined that the response
is to be found in the eyes of the others. The labels for the real object
of the mimetic quest may vary: some speak of recognition, others
of self-determination and self-esteem. In less cognitive and philosophical versions, this is the “other-directed” subject, desirous,
above all else, of the others’ love and approval.

In another variant, instead of puzzling over the problem of selfidentity, the uncertain mimetic creature puzzles over the nature of
the world, especially the question of its values. The guiding question is not “Who am I?” but “What is to be done?” The mimetic
agent seeks in others the knowledge he or she lacks. Perhaps these
others know which objects and actions are inherently best; perhaps some other person can be found who has a privileged viewpoint. Girard touches upon this idea in the following phrase:
“When modern theorists envisage man as a being who knows what
he wants, or who at least possesses an ‘unconscious’ that knows for

him, they may simply have failed to perceive the domain in which
human uncertainty is most extreme” (VS 145—46/204). And again:
“The human subject does not really know what to desire, in the last
resort. He is quite incapable on his own of fixing his desire on one
object and, on his own, of desiring that object consistently and
relentlessly. That 1s why he is given over to the paradoxes of mimetic desire” (TH 373/478).
Another subvariety of this approach may be identified: André
Orléan’s rationally mimetic agent, who knows that he or she does
not know which choice is best.”? Having found another agent who
makes a choice, mimetic agents copy this choice, not because they
believe that the model certainly knows, but because they think
there is a chance that the model might know. Or again, it may be
that the rationally mimetic agent knows very well that the others
have no real knowledge of the intrinsic value of things and considers that the others are also behaving mimetically. In this case,
the rationally mimetic agent understands that the pragmatic value
of the object—for example, its price on the market—will effec-

&

Approaches to Mimetic Desire

tively be determined by the results of a mimetic interaction that
happens to converge on a particular unanimous decision. In this
manner, rationally mimetic agents enhance their own (subjective)
probability of success. In another variety, the situation is similar,

but the mimetic agents in fact believe that the model possesses the
lacking knowledge. This mimetic agent is mimetic because he or
she believes that the model truly knows something; the model is
thought to have a “secret” knowledge as to what is truly valuable
and desirable.

The Ambivalent

Mime

According to this line of interpretation, which is inspired by a certain reading of G. W. F. Hegel and Alexandre Kojéve, to say that
desire is mimetic is to say that desire is always an improper desire
for the proper, a self-consciousness that seeks itself in the other,
the other being perceived as a self who dispossesses oneself from
oneself. Thus Mikkel Borch-Jacobsen claims that a profoundly ambivalent relationship between self and other is prior to any specific
manifestation of desire, and he posits this ambivalence as the
fundamental intersubjective relation. The essence of this relation is
conflict: “Desire is violence because it is a desire for a being of
one’s own, a desire for self-possession [parce qu’1l est désir Wétrepropre, désir de propriation], and as such, an allergic, murderous desire.”8 This conflictual desiring relation, this ambivalent mixture
of philia and netkos, is said to be prior to any particular objects of
desire; indeed, it is constitutive of, and anterior to, all of the effects

that psychological theories may label as the “objects” and “subjects” of desire. Girard’s error, then, would be his occasional em-

phasis on the role of the object in such rivalries, for at times he
states that conflict is generated by a mimetic convergence on a sin-

gle object.
Girard sometimes comes close to asserting that mimetic interaction is necessarily and essentially an objectless struggle. He has
stated, for example, that the double bind, far from being a matter

of pathological cases, is an extremely common phenomenon, “so

8 - Models of Desire

common that it might be said to form the basis of all human relationships” (VS 147/206—7). At times he asserts explicitly that
mimetic desire is essentially conflictual. Thus Girard affirms that
“mimesis coupled with desire leads automatically to conflict” (VS
146/205). In the same work he states that “mimetism 1s a source of
continual conflict. By making one man’s desire into a replica of
another man’s desire, it invariably leads to rivalry; and rivalry in
turn transforms desire into violence” (VS 169/235). In another

text we find the following characterization of desire: “Desire is the
mimetic crisis in itself; it is the acute mimetic rivalry with the other

that occurs in all the circumstances we call ‘private, ranging from
eroticism to professional or intellectual ambition” (TH 288/408).

The essential ambivalence at the heart of such pursuits is analyzed
as follows: “The subject has no wish to triumph completely over
the rival; he has no wish for the rival to triumph completely over
him. In the first event, the object would fall to him, but it would

have lost all value. In the second event, the object would attain
infinite value, but it would be forever outside his reach” (TH
361/500). Thus the subject’s relation to the conflict with the other

is one of profound ambivalence insofar as no lasting satisfaction of
desire is to be had in either victory or defeat.

The Paradoxical Narcissist

Another manner of interpreting Girard’s basic idea is to say that
the mimetic agent prizes one thing: self-sufficiency. The surest
sign of its lack is to experience a romantic desire or passion for
someone else. Yet the agent inevitably succumbs to such desires,
and their complete absence is a condition that only others can plausibly be imagined to enjoy. Thus, this subject’s model—who is
also the object of desire —is a person thought to embody a successful form of narcissism. Desire is self-defeating because a mimetic
enslavement to such a model guarantees that the subject can never
successfully realize the essential desire for individual autonomy.
Girard writes: “Desire implies a contradiction; it aims at complete
autonomy, at a near divine self-sufficiency, and yet it is imitative.”?

9 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

In discussing Proust, Girard again adopts such an emphasis:
“Everybody believes that someone else possesses the self he wants
to acquire. That is why everybody experiences desire. . . . Since
every desire secks self-sufficiency, no one really possesses it.”!
My evocation of interpretations of the basic mimetic intuition
does not amount to an exhaustive survey of the extant readings of
Girard, but it should suffice to demonstrate that there are some

very different ways of specifying the essential dispositions of the
agent of mimetic desire. In the light of these major differences, it is
not the least bit self-evident that the term “mimetic desire” has a
univocal and coherent meaning. Does this lead us to the conclusion that the notion is ambiguous and that it should be discarded? I
think not, but I do believe that a mimetic psychology cannot coherently embrace all of these characterizations beneath some simple and sovereign concept of mimetic desire. Instead, some distinctions and subcategories must be provided, and in what follows

I shall be considering how this might be done.
One way to understand the multiplicity of portraits of homo
mimeticus 1s to consider that at least some of them are very good
depictions of different manifestations or subvarieties of mimetic
desire. Girard frequently refers to very different personality formations, attitudes, and strategies as the “stages” of a single mimetic dynamic or process, thereby suggesting that mimetic desire
is not to be conceived of as a uniform and undifferentiated entity.
Yet at the same time, Girard wants to stress the unity of the phe-

nomenon. For example, in his book on the novel, Girard asserts
that the diverse forms of the mimetic triangle are organized within
a “universal structure.” He likens this structure to a falling object,
the shape of which changes as the speed of its descent increases. If
different novelists emphasize different aspects of desire, it 1s because they observe the object at different stages of its fall. The goal
of Girard’s own theory is different: “Moving freely from one to the
other, it attempts to espouse the very movement of the metaphysical structure; it seeks to establish a ‘topology’ of imitative desire”
(DDN 94—95/113). This kind of emphasis on the “dynamics” of
mimetic desire, on the “stages” and “levels” of a single “structure”

10 - Models of Desire
or “mechanism” of desire, is sometimes carried forward into the

later texts. For example, Girard declares that “for me, there is only
one and the same structure in perpetual becoming.”!!
The implications of these claims must be explored in detail in
any thorough confrontation with Girard’s views on mimetic desire. This point has been stressed by Jean-Pierre Dupuy, who acknowledges that Girard’s theory of mimetic desire is not reducible
to a disparate collection of mimetic “figures” insofar as Girard
makes strong claims about a “dynamic” continuity between the
“stages” of mimetic desire. It is necessary, then, to state the precise

nature of the “laws governing the transitions between these different figures.” Is there a “logic of these transitions” as Dupuy suggests?!2 If so, then neither Dupuy nor Girard has presented an ex-

plicit description of this logic. Perhaps the differences between
some of the competing approaches and emphases correspond to a
focus on different moments in the development or logical progression of mimesis. Yet if these differences correspond to aspects or
moments of the same thing, what is it that remains invariant? What
are the basic and indispensable constituents of any example of
mimetic desire? Answers to such questions must be provided if talk
of the universal structure of desire “according to the other” is to
be made clear. And in the absence of this clarification, it is impos-

sible to say anything very precise about the empirical value of the
theory.
If the diverse facets of mimetic desire are to be related to each
other more systematically, it will be necessary to take up the issue
of the relation between the basic psychological concepts and the
specific contexts within which human desire finds its particular
manifestations and inflections. It may be argued that in spite of
their sweeping quality, some of the interpretations of mimetic
desire surveyed above really amount to character sketches or
snapshots of the particular clothing worn by the mimetic agent in
specific cultural contexts. What should be sought at the level of
abstract theory, then, is a formulation of mimetic desiring that is as
neutral as possible in regard to the particular contextual features
with which the motivational structures interact in actual life histories. But this requires that the conceptual models of the different

11 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

forms of mimetic desire be kept distinct from many of the particular factors that appear in the concrete manifestation of human desire. To claim that the mimetic agent adopts an essentially religious
attitude toward the model, or again, that the imitator desires the

model’s “being,” is to fail in this regard, for this kind of stipulation
amounts to an undue generalization of one type of configuration
of belief, desire, and behavior, a generalization that needlessly
limits the potential empirical scope of the theory.
In short, the “basic intuition” of a mimetic psychology, the idea
that people may desire “according to the other,” could use some
clarification, which is indeed the central aim of the present study.
In view of the chaotic results of the interpretations that identify
the philosophical and world-historical implications of a mimetic
desire that has never been rigorously defined, it is important to
proceed slowly and to spell out what may seem painfully obvious
to some. One manner of exploring the basic intuition behind the
concept of mimetic desire 1s to isolate the differences between this
concept and some of Girard’s other concepts of mimesis. A careful

reading of Girard’s work underscores the necessity of distinguishing between “mimetic desire” and other related terms, such as
“acquisitive” (or “appropriative”) “mimesis” and “conflictual” (or
“antagonistic”) “mimesis” (for my analysis of the latter terms, see
chapter 3). If the word “mimesis” can be employed to designate a
very broad class of behavior and psychological states, then mimetic
desire, which may itself take several distinct forms, must be posited
as a subset of mimesis, a subset to be defined in terms of additional

and more complex criteria or traits. Not all behavior, and not
all desire, then, is mimetic. Girardians who favor an imperialistic

theory of mimetic desire may not like this assumption, but they
should recall that the question of the relative empirical frequency
of occurrences of the two kinds of desire is left open. I see no advantage to wiring into the model the sweeping assertion that all

instances of desire are instances of mimetic desire. Although my
approach in what follows will at first be somewhat atomistic in
that the initial aim will be to construct definitions of individual
states, attitudes, and episodes, the theory of mimetic desire in view

is a theory of personality and of social interaction that can be artic-

12 - Models of Desire

ulated in relation to descriptions of specific sociohistorical contexts. One of the boldest claims that is associated with Girard’s theory is the idea that reference to the psychological mechanisms of
mimetic desire can explain some of the major differences and transitions between sociohistorical and cultural contexts. The status of
that sort of explanatory claim will be a central topic in what follows, and I shall be stressing the difficulty of providing anything
like a rigorous, context-free description of a mimetic mechanism.

Psychological Assumptions

It is clear that some of the most important differences between interpretations of Girard’s ideas derive from the fundamentally dif-

ferent psychological assumptions that readers bring to bear on his
work. In my view, some of those assumptions betray the specificity
of Girard’s intuitions. For example, although it is true that Girard
has developed some of his ideas in a dialogue with psychoanalysis, it strikes me as a fundamental error to attempt to fold his notions back into that sort of approach. To mention only a few basic
points, Girard expressly rejects the Freudian concepts of repression and narcissism, the energetic model of libidinal forces, and the
developmental bias that situates the fundamental and lasting determinants of personality in early childhood. Some of Girard’s terminology and notions may retain a psychoanalytic flavor, but I
leave it to others to show why his work can and should be recast in
terms of some particular version of psychoanalysis. My view is that
there is no chance of faithfully elucidating Girard in this manner,
and little chance of thereby coming up with any superior psychological hypotheses.!8
In what follows I shall adopt a different strategy. My idea is that
the valuable intuitions concerning mimetic desire and interaction
can be situated within the general framework of a psychology that
explains human beings’ purposeful activity in terms of such attitudes as beliefs, desires, and intentions. Before I begin, in the next

chapter, my clarification of the basic elements of mimetic desire,
then, I must first say a few things about how I conceive of this

13 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

general psychological framework, justifying its application to
Girard’s ideas. To that end I shall present some basic ideas from
work in theoretical psychology and in the philosophy of action.
My goal will not be to discuss all of the outstanding technical
problems in these fields, and even less do I pretend to be in a position to resolve them. I shall assume that a reconstructed theory of
mimetic desire can and should be compatible with significantly
different stances on a good number of the outstanding issues in
theoretical psychology, which is not to say, of course, that it is in-

different in regard to all such issues.
How, then, do intentionalist psychological explanations work,
and what is the place of desire within them? It may be helpful to
begin by presenting a schematic and relatively simple example.
Suppose that I look out my window at home and see my next-door
neighbor outside in his backyard. He lifts an axe and brings it
down hard on a piece of wood that he has positioned on another,
larger block of wood, and the axe head gets stuck. Then I see him
pulling up hard at the axe handle while he holds the piece of wood
down with one foot. In what is referred to as an everyday psychological explanation of this action, I assume that this behavior was
subjectively meaningful to the person who engaged in it, and I try
to understand this behavior in terms of certain mental states,

which may be referred to quite generally as attitudes or reasons. I
assume, furthermore, that I can explain the behavior in terms of
the reasons that guided and brought it about. If I assumed on the
contrary that the person had no attitudes, or that the person’s attitudes were purely epiphenomenal and played no role in guiding
that person’s behavior, then I would have no reason for trying to
attribute the right attitudes to the person or to explain that person’s doings in terms of them. But in attitude psychology, we typically begin with the assumption that we should try to arrive at a
satisfactory explanation of what people do by attributing certain
attitudes or mental states to them. We also assume that such explanations sometimes work. So when I see my neighbor strike the
piece of wood with his axe, I may assume, for example, that he

believes that a blow of this sort has some chance of splitting the
piece of wood into smaller pieces. This is an example of what are

14 + Models of Desire

called the agent’s “instrumental beliefs,” which generally take the
form “performing an action of some type X will or might have the
result of type Y.” It is often assumed that beliefs of this sort alone
do not suffice to explain why someone does something. I must also
conjecture that my neighbor has certain desires associated with
these beliefs, or more generally, I assume that he has some motiva-

tion for wanting to split the piece of wood. He wants to bring
about a certain result, and he believes that an action of a certain

type will achieve this end. The key idea here is that this belief and
this desire together orient—and perhaps even cause—an action of
the relevant type. According to Donald Davidson’s highly influential analysis, I explain what my neighbor did by attributing to him
a “primary reason,” that is, a combination of belief and “pro attitude” that together cause the action.!* All other things being
equal, I may even be able to predict accurately that my neighbor
will do something similar at a future time, on the assumption that
the same desires and beliefs will be operative.
Some philosophers have in recent times denigrated the kind of
everyday psychological attribution evoked in this example, for
they say that this kind of talk is too unreliable and imprecise to
merit the title “explanation.”!5 Even if we reject a global and metaphysical assault on this sort of psychology, it does seem important
to recognize that our intentionalist psychology is highly fallible.
An intentional explanation can fail in at least two major ways. It
fails externally when an adequate grasp of the preferences and beliefs of the actor does not seem to be enough and we want to know
how these attitudes emerged and what external factors shaped that
process.!° We want to go “upstream” to the complex conditions
that led to the agent’s being in a particular situation and equipped
the agent with a particular set of psychological dispositions. An
intentional explanation fails internally when we do not make the
correct attributions. People often attribute the wrong motives and
beliefs to each other and are often simply at a loss as to the attitudes that orient others’ actions; on many occasions, they try to
explain someone’s doings in terms of deep-seated dispositions or
personality traits when in fact the activity in question was not
guided by any such things. The fact that these kinds of shortcom-

15 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

ings are always possible is not a sufficient reason for rejecting this
sort of approach entirely; on the contrary, it strikes me as a good
argument for the importance of trying to clarify and improve it.
A key problem in the theory of action is how to identify the
ingredients of a successful action explanation.!” An aspect of this
issue that is directly pertinent to Girard’s theory centers on the role
of desire and other motivational terms. In this regard, we may refer
to the debate between “Humean” and “anti-Humean” positions,
or between what are sometimes called the “cognitivist” and “conativist” stances on the role of desire and other motivational concepts in intentionalist psychology.!8 Conativism is in general the
view that cognitive states alone cannot generate action: there must
be at least one motivational state whenever there is genuine action.
This general “conativist” stance is compatible with the view that
beliefs are necessary to action, but the point is that beliefs are not
alone sufficient: at least one of what Davidson has called the “pro
attitudes” is also required. Julien Sorel may know that Madame
Rénal’s hand is there in the dark, within reach, but unless he is

motivated to grasp that hand, he will remain immobile. Strong
conativism, which is sometimes associated with David Hume, 1s

the view that the “passion” of desire is an essential component in
any explanation of an intentional action; desire, then, is a neces-

sary but not a sufficient condition of the latter. More moderate and
weaker versions of conativism can be developed by defining the
necessary motivational state much more broadly, but the essential
thesis is that belief alone cannot suffice to get someone going.
Cognitivists generally contend that although attitudes or states
such as desire may sometimes help to explain action, such states are
neither necessary nor sufficient conditions for action: sometimes
people do something that they do not really desire or want to do,
simply because they believe they should do it. It is coherent to
imagine a Julien Sorel who does not really desire to take Madame
Rénal’s hand but who does so because he does not want to think of
himself as a coward. Cognitivists assert that it is not legitimate to
infer that a person who voluntarily and intentionally performed an
unpleasant action under duress or coercion “desired” to perform
that action. Here we may distinguish between two versions of this

16 + Models of Desire

thesis. A moderate version of cognitivism rejects the strong conativist’s claim that desire is a necessary term in action explanations; a
stronger version of cognitivism rejects the idea that any notion of
motivation at all is necessary to action. In its most extreme form,
cognitivism claims that motivational concepts never contribute
anything to action explanations that cognitive notions could not
contribute. Don Locke, for example, argues that beliefs suffice
for action; in his “sufficient reason thesis,” desire and other moti-

vational states are excluded from the explanation of intentional
action, and motivational research in psychology is said to be
useless,72

Defining Desire and Motivation

Let us take a closer look at this debate over the role of motivational
concepts in action explanations. The key issue here has to do with
the difference between a “cognitive” and a “motivational” state.
How might that difference be explicated so that our questions
about the roles of the two types of attitudes could be answered? To
clarify this problem, let us return to my simple example. Suppose
the neighbor whom I have seen regularly chopping wood in his
backyard all winter long one year does not do so the following
year. The woodpile is still there, and it is still cold outside, and I
have every reason to assume that his fireplace remains in working
condition. How do I explain the difference in the neighbor’s behavior? Clearly, we must look for the relevant differences, which
could have to do with any number of factors. It could be that the
neighbor has had health problems and 1s no longer physically capable of chopping wood, in which case an action explanation

could not tell the whole story, for the simple reason that it cannot
tell us anything about the causes of the agent’s physical incapacity.
But let us assume that the relevant differences in fact have to do
with a change in the agent’s attitudes. We can easily invent a story
in which this is so, and we will begin with one that seems to call for
and support conativist assumptions. So here is what happened:
previously, the neighbor wanted to build fires, and therefore he

17 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

wanted to chop the wood into the smaller pieces deemed necessary

to that end. But this year, the neighbor does not want to build fires
any more, because his desire to do so has been countered by another, stronger inclination: he now wants to stop contributing to
the pollution of the atmosphere, so he refrains from chopping
wood and building fires. So it is a change in motivation that ex-

plains the difference in behavior. Now, how could a cognitivist
give an equally good explanation of this situation without
bringing in any motivational states? Well, the cognitivist could
contend that it is a belief and not a motivational state that is decisive: first the neighbor believed it would be good to build fires,
then he believed it would be bad, and this change in belief explains
why he stopped. The cognitivist adds that such evaluative beliefs,
along with other instrumental beliefs, suffice to explain action (including refraining, if that is what the neighbor’s behavior is considered to be).
The conativist response to this position is that the cognitivist
has not really explained the two actions without relying on any
motivational notions; instead, the cognitivist has avoided talking

about a change in the neighbor’s desires by talking instead about a
change in evaluative beliefs. This, the conativist claims, is a matter

of relying on a category of attitudes that in fact play a motivational
and not a purely cognitive role. Although it can indeed be said that
the neighbor has a belief about air pollution, if it 1s going to make
a decisive difference, this belief has to involve commitment to a

kind of all-out evaluative assessment. It is not a matter of someone
having beliefs about, or knowledge of, the content ofcertain value
judgments; rather, it is a matter of someone actually adopting a

certain evaluative attitude and of this attitude playing a particular,
motivational role in influencing the agent’s activities. Moreover,
this evaluative belief amounts to a decisive preference for one kind
of state of affairs as opposed to another. According to the conativist, the key point is that the cognitivist has to agree that the
items in the example that have the most explanatory relevance are
those that the cognitivist refers to as the evaluative beliefs, and the
conativist goes on to claim that these states play a motivational and
not a purely cognitive role. But the strength of this contention of

18 - Models of Desire

course depends on our ability to say what it means for an attitude
to play one kind of functional role as opposed to another, which in
turn involves the key differences between motivational and cognitive roles. The claim is that reason explanations work with a distinction between at least two (and probably more) categories of
attitudes that are held to be capable of explaining a difference in
behavior. The two main questions that arise here, then, are (a)
how the distinction between motivation and cognitive items
works and (4) whether it is really necessary to successful action
explanations.
As is well known, it is extremely difficult to give a noncircular
definition of any one motivational term in isolation. Yet explications of one motivational concept couched in terms of other
motivational concepts hardly seem illuminating: it is not informative to say that desire is a species of sensuous longing, which is a
kind of wanting, which is a form of favoring, which is a noncomparative version of preferring.?° Yet what terms can we use to arrest
this progressive slippage of desire and anchor the category of
motivation in something else? It may seem glaringly obvious that
the difference between cognitive and motivational terms surely
must reside in their different relations to action and/or behavior,

yet the nature of this difference is especially difficult to delineate. It
has often been proposed that motivation can be defined in dispositional terms: to say that an agent has a desire for something is to
say that the agent has a disposition that would lead to a certain
behavior under the right circumstances. “John is motivated to
chop wood” is like “sugar is soluble”: John may not be chopping
wood right now, but he has the desire, or rather the disposition, to
do so. But as W. V. O. Quine has observed, in the case of such

terms as “desire” and “want,” we have no rigorous description of
the relevant conditions under which the disposition is actually
manifested— nothing that corresponds to the “when put in water”
clause in the dispositional statement about sugar’s solubility.2!
When an effort is made to specify those conditions, it is tempting
to say that desire leads to action provided that no other, stronger
desire gets in the way. But there is a danger of vicious circularity
here, for we have just included the term “desire” in the action-

19 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

dispositional analysis of desire. What is more, human beings do
not act on all of their desires (fortunately!), which implies that it
will not suffice to say that motivational states such as desires,
wants, and preferences are dispositions to act.
A modification of the same approach is to suggest that desire

can be defined as the disposition, not to act, but to engage in certain forms of mental behavior, such as planning or some sort of
intending. This move would be supported by the idea that a person’s believing that a state of affairs is or is not the case does not
typically imply that this person is any more or less likely to entertain any particular plan relative to that state of affairs. Attitudes of
desire, on the other hand, do warrant such an inference: when an

agent stands in an attitude of desire toward a situation, he or she is
more likely (at least) to entertain the possibility of acting in some
way relative to that situation (e.g., so as to bring about the actual
existence of that situation). Yet an objection to this approach is
that people may have some desires that they never expect to see
satisfied; they never plan to act in a way intended to satisfy these
desires. If desire is a disposition, it only sometimes results in action, and only sometimes in planning and intending. What, then,

is the minimal behavioral manifestation of the disposition?
The basic problem here is that the functional role of motivational terms cannot be defined in isolation, for this class of terms

acquires its specificity in contrast to the role played by all other
kinds of attributions, for example, attributions of nonevaluative

beliefs. This means that it is systems of wants, rather than any one
in isolation, that give rise to action, and they do this in conjunc-

tion with beliefs.22 The conclusion would seem to be that the only

viable approach to action explanation is one that begins with an
interrelated system of beliefs, desires, and actions. This basic insight was already expressed by G. E. M. Anscombe in Intention, tor
she comments that “the primitive sign of wanting 1s trying to get;
which of course can only be ascribed to creatures endowed with
sensation . . . the ascription of sensible knowledge and of volition
go together.”?3 Other philosophers seem to agree that this general
strategy should be adopted. Richard Brandt and Jaegwon Kim
note that the notion of “want” gets it meaning from its systematic

20 - Models of Desire

link to “impulse,” “pleasure,” and “disappointment.” It is a sign
that one wants something when one experiences pleasure when
one suddenly gets it by surprise—other things being equal, of
course. Robert Audi weaves the concept of “wanting” into a texture of associated feelings, thoughts, and actions.74 Similarly,
Robert Stalnaker says that desire and belief are “correlative dispositional states of a potentially rational agent. To desire that P is
to be disposed to act in ways that would tend to bring it about that
P in a world in which one’s beliefs, whatever they are, were true.
To believe that P is to be disposed to act in ways that would tend to
satisfy one’s desires, whatever they are, in a world in which P (to-

gether with one’s other beliefs) were true.”25 More recently, Michael Smith has elaborated a similar position, couching the functional differences in terms of different “directions of fit” that
characterize relations between types of attitudes and the world.?¢
This kind of functional contrast is, in my view, the best approach to describing how the distinction between motivational
and cognitive terms works. The distinction ultimately rests on the
following implicit assumption: all other things being equal and
given “the same” cognitive states (i.¢., a sufficient, functional sim-

ilarity between them), differences in behavior should be explained
in terms of differences in motivational factors. The contrast is also
supported by the inverse assumption: given “the same” motivational factors (or a sufficient functional similarity between them),
differences in behavior should be explained in terms of differences
in cognitive states. The distinction “works,” then, by providing a

contrastive heuristic that guides our search for pertinent differences when we formulate action explanations. It should be noted
that the distinction is not based on the specific introspective
qualities or phenomenological properties of the two types of attitudes: the claim is not that desire feels one way and belief another,
or that the individual has infallible knowledge of these states.?7
But we have not answered the cognitivist’s second question: is
this kind of dichotomy necessary to successful action explanations,
and if so, why? Cognitivists may wish to propose some candidates
for successful action explanations that involve no such contrast.
A relevant example is briefly discussed by George Wilson, but I

21 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

hasten to add that Wilson does not introduce this example with the
goal of advocating a restrictive, cognitivist view of action explanation.?8 Wilson imagines a case in which someone intentionally
performs an action without having any positive attitude toward it.
A public speaker has acquired the mannerism of tugging at his earlobe once or twice while giving a lecture. He is fully aware of performing this gesture while he does it. On a particular occasion
while giving a speech, the speaker knowingly raises his hand to his
ear, in order to tug at the earlobe, yet he is wholly indifferent toward this action and has no genuine motivation in favor of it. “It is
just something that he now and then does, and, after all, what is

the harm in it?” Wilson goes on to suggest that it intuitively seems
a genuine possibility that a man could perform an action X in
order to Y “without caring a bit about whether he Y’s or not.”29
Thus the “in order to” that is the mark of intentional, purposive
action 1s maintained in the absence of a motivational attribution.
But I think a conativist can respond that the example is not in fact a
plausible case of an adequate action explanation. First of all, the
example is a case of something that borders on subintentional behavior, and Wilson admits that the gesture may be performed “impulsively.” But let us reason about this gesture as if it were an instance ofintentional action. In that case, we need to grant that the
public speaker believes that he can either tug at his earlobe or not
tug at it. What needs to be explained 1s why he acts on the former
possibility, and to do that, we need to invoke some sort of motivation, albeit a rather thin one. There may be some sense in which
the man is “indifferent” to the gesture—that is, he does not believe it especially valuable, important, or desirable—but if we are

to explain the repeated, intentional gesture as purposive action
and not as the result of some purely mechanical, subintentional
process, we must also say that there is a sense in which he is not
fully and perfectly indifferent to it: for example, we might assume
that he favors it slightly because he thinks it grants him some small
release of tension when speaking in public.
The point, then, is that the agent’s effective favoring of one action as opposed to another is only explicable in terms of some kind
of effective evaluation, preference, or inclination, all of which are

22. - Models of Desire

properly motivational terms. To see this, let us return to the case of
the neighbor who has left off chopping wood. We try to explain
this in purely cognitive terms, and the analysis seems promising
when we find out that the neighbor recently read a lot of articles
about the ecological situation, including one that focused on the
role played by smoke from homeowners’ fireplaces. My neighbor
believed what he read, and this new belief acquisition is clearly an
important factor in the change in behavior. What else do we need?
But what about the possibility that my neighbor believed what he
read in the article but did not care enough to want to refrain from
building fires? That case is possible, and significantly different
from the one in which this belief led to a change in behavior. The
advent of this belief —even though it is a strong, evaluative sort of
belief in the goodness or badness of some action—is not alone
enough to explain the difference (all other things being equal). It
only becomes sufficient when we ascribe to this event the properly
motivational role of generating the agent’s intention to refrain
henceforth from fire building and the related activities.
Has the conativist won the argument with the cognitivist? I
think that the case against the extreme version of cognitivism has
indeed been made, for it seems clear that some successful action

explanations do work with the kind of contrast between motivational and cognitive terms that I have evoked. We cannot really
imagine successful action explanations where no such dichotomy
is Operative; in other words, there are no viable models of agency

involving only cognitive states or only motivational ones. Another
argument in support of this thesis, which I shall not develop here,
would suggest that it is precisely the contrast between these two
categories of interacting attitudes that is necessary to the various
important concepts that may be grouped beneath the rubric “motivated irrationality” (a good example being “wishful thinking”)
.3¢
The arguments that I have just presented militate in favor of
Girard’s strong emphasis on the role of desire in orienting human
activity. But it is important to note at this point that the arguments
I have been presenting against cognitivism do not necessarily support any of the stronger versions of conativism, and indeed, that
has not been my intention. I turn now to a discussion of what I

23 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire
take to be the valuable intuitions behind a cognitivist stance on
action explanation, for I believe that these intuitions are an important corrective to some of the prevalent excesses of conativism.
The debate between strong and moderate versions of conativism
leads quite directly to a discussion of the different senses of “desire.”3! Two very basic senses may usefully be identified: on the one
hand, “desire” is understood to designate some kind of sensuous
or passionate longing for some state of affairs; on the other hand,
there is the broad sense of desire as a very general kind of motivational state: “whatever tends to move the agent to act” (other
things being equal).3? “Desire” in this latter sense is synonymous
with “want” or “preference.” These two senses of desire must be
kept in mind if we want to avoid conflating strong and moderate
versions of the conativist thesis. The strong claim is that desire, in
the sense of appetitive or sensuous longing for something, is a necessary element in action. Yet it is possible to attack this rather extreme idea by pointing to the many cases where people hardly
seem to be motivated by any such urges. For example, one may
never have a genuine desire to take out the garbage yet may be
motivated to do so on a regular basis. In my view, the only way a
conativist can deal with such examples is by shifting from the narrow to the broad sense of “desire,” arguing that some kind of want
or preference has to be present to motivate action. The conativist
goes on to say that the deliberative process will be endless unless
some overarching desire—1in the broad sense— puts a stop to motivational regress. Dutiful agents must desire being dutiful more
than they desire the other possibilities they contemplate, for otherwise they would never form any decisive, present-directed intention to act on one belief as opposed to another. Soldiers may very
well believe that they should be dutiful instead of seeking to save
their own hides, but this belief cannot be determinant and produce
action unless the soldiers have a decisive desire to do what they
believe they should do, as opposed to something else.
The moderate conativist’s notion of “desire,” then, which is said

to be a necessary (but not sufficient) precondition to action, is a
generic motivational state, a rough-grained concept that involves
no fine distinctions between the varieties of what Davidson has

24 - Models of Desire
called “pro attitudes,” such as needing, wanting, wishing, prefer-

ring, longing for, lusting after, and so on. In my view, it 1s only this
sort of moderate conativism that survives the cognitivist’s criticisms, for many perfectly plausible action explanations work with
evaluative beliefs and preferences instead of any of the “hotter”
motivational terms (“desire” in the sense of lust, longing, or blind

motivational force). In what follows, I shall often use the term
“desire” in the broad sense, partly because I believe that Girard’s
own use of the term emerges out of a philosophical tradition that
employs it to evoke an all-encompassing motivational concept.*? It
should be kept in mind that this usage is not meant to imply that
there is never a conflict between an agent’s different desires, or that

there is no difference between an agent’s strongest desire (in the
narrow sense) and that same agent’s overall motivation, which also
embraces the agent’s values and preferences. Desire alone, even the

agent’s strongest desire, does not yield the agent’s preponderant
motivation.*4

Desire and the Subject

Some of Girard’s readers may be quite surprised that one could
even begin to entertain the idea of a rapprochement between his
views and cognitive approaches to human agency, and their conclusion may be that I have chosen the wrong sort of psychological
framework. After all, one of the central and most explicit thrusts of
Girard’s thought is his rejection of myths ofindividual autonomy,
rational control, personal lucidity, and so on: far from being a
“philosophy of consciousness,” his theory insists on the role of desire, and moreover, a type of desire that is a source of blindness,

conflict, and delusion. Girard’s theme is conation, not cognition:
he explicitly claims that he wants to break with a philosophical tradition that conceives of mimesis as representation, and not as desire and interaction. Such an ambition leads him to employ expressions in which “desire” is made the determining condition of a
very wide range of behavior. For example, Girard writes that “far

25 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire
from being unconscious in Freud’s sense and only appearing in its
true form in our dreams, desire not only observes but never stops
thinking about the meaning of its observations. Desire is always reflection on desire” (TH 328/460, Girard’s emphasis). In another
passage Girard asserts flatly that “desire is, finally, the first to acquire a knowledge about itself that it finds unbearable.”35 As we
read on, it would seem that “desire” (and the mechanism that
Girard associates with it) is “responsible” for all sorts of activities,
including a wide range of seemingly intentional actions and cognitive attitudes: desire “knows,” “misunderstands,” “forgets,”
“deceives itself,” and so on. In other words, Girard sometimes de-

scribes desire as if it were what pulled the strings of the human
marionette, and this string puller would seem to be a kind of homonculus equipped with whatever cognitive faculties are required
for complex feats of reflecting, learning, and forgetting.
I believe that Girard’s emphasis on the characteristics of human
desire and his particular analyses of them are extremely important
and offer many precious insights. Yet I must at this point present
my reservations about his apparent tendency to reduce any number of different psychological states, and most notably the full
range of attitudes, to the control of a single entity called “desire”
(sometimes the reduction is even more extreme: not only are states
of belief and intention said to be controlled by desire, they are said
to be nothing more than manifestations and effects of an Omnibus
Named Desire). The question of the status of such allegories is
directly posed in Des choses cachées depuss la fondation du monde
when Oughourlian quite aptly poses Girard the following question about his use of the term “desire”: “You are saying that ‘desire’
does this and that. . . . Would you not agree that you are tending
to give desire a false identity? [Ne pensez-vous pas que vous étes en
train ahypostasier le désir?|}? (TH 303/428). Girard’s response,
which is also his most explicit statement on the issue, reads as
follows:
If desire is the same for all of us, and if it is the key to the system of relationships, there is no reason not to make it the real “subject” of the struc-

26 + Models of Desire
ture—a subject that comes back to mimesis in the end. I avoid saying
“desiring subject” so as not to give the impression of relapsing into a psychology of the subject. (TH 303/428)

In my view, this is a wholly inadequate justification for a usage
that, in its autonomizing of an “entity” called “desire,” in fact carries strong idealist connotations and effaces many important psychological distinctions— distinctions that Girard himself consistently and carefully makes at other points in his analyses. Desire
should not be understood as a disembodied allegorical figure, but
as a word that can be used to classify certain kinds of psychological
states. On any plausible nonidealist account, the term “desire” can
only be held to refer to some invariant features of the “states” or
“conditions” of a living organism having physicochemical instantiations. At a higher level of abstraction, one could refer to
certain invariant features ranging across the desiring states of a collection of these organisms, but it is important not to lose sight of
the fact that this is an abstraction, a classification of invariant fea-

tures of distinct states of affairs in the world. In this sense alone is
there a basis for a unified concept of “desire” that could refer truthfully to a single kind of situation. Yet various thinkers would contest the unity of desire, and Girard has not demonstrated or proven
that all particular states of desiring are in some strong sense “identical” or that there exists a single “structure” to which all such phenomena can be related. To say that there is never more than a single
and selfsame desire is very rash, a bit of bluster that can only come
between the cautious reader and the real value of Girard’s insights.
Moreover, this kind of rhetorical flourish is not supported by
what Girard himself rightly goes on to say about the important
differences between the behavioral phenomena that one may associate with desire, on the one hand, and a range of different psychological states, on the other. Some of the crucial distinctions between types and stages of mimetic desire drawn by Girard hinge
precisely on the agent’s ability or inability to have reliable beliefs
about aspects of the motivational processes and intersubjective situations in which the agent is involved, which implies that a dis-

Qk * Approaches to Mimetic Desire

tinction between desire and belief is already implicit in Girard’s
theorizing. A central example is his “law of the psychological circle,” which has to do with a kind of blind spot that is typical of
those involved in “internal mediation” (DDN 73—74/90—92). In
developing Girard’s notion of double mediation (see chapter 4), it
is certainly necessary to refer to the desiring agents’ beliefs, for
Girard explicitly links levels of blindness and awareness, concerning self and other, respectively, to the distance between subject and

mediator. Girard insists again and again on what the desiring
agent (and in his shorthand, desire itself) understands and misunderstands, forgets and remembers, expects and assumes. Nor is his

emphasis on these cognitive states compatible with the idea that
they make no difference to the course of desire. Not only does
Girard emphasize the idea that desire is always reflection on desire
but he grants this reflection a decisive role. Desire is influenced and
oriented by this reflection: “From the basis of this reflection, it
takes its direction and, from time to time, modifies its own struc-

tures. Desire is a strategist and it alters its aim, if I can put it like
that, as a function of what it has learned about itself” (TH 328-—
29/460-—61). It is quite clear in these phrases that the beliefs and
other intentional attitudes attributed to the processes of mimetic
desire are not the least bit epiphenomenal in Girard’s view, for they
are said to determine the very course of desire: desire observes,
interprets, and draws false conclusions, and it is these conclusions

that serve as the basis of ulterior states of desire and whatever actions are linked to them.
To follow the complexities of Girard’s analyses of mimetic desire, it is necessary to adopt a psychological framework that allows
us to distinguish between the roles played by motivational and
cognitive items. In spite of some of the formulations that I have
just criticized, many of Girard’s analyses are already squarely situated in the kind of psychology that I have been advocating, for he
consistently tries to explain agents’ activities in terms of meaningful relations between the propositional contents of their attitudes
and reasons. This is as it should be, for attempts to abandon this

approach run contrary to some of the most basic and uncontrover-

28 - Models of Desire

sial features of our framework of psychological understanding. Believing that a certain situation is the case is surely not the same
thing as having a desire that would be satisfied should that situation be factual. The existence of cases where one believes something to be true without desiring either the reality or one’s knowledge of it runs contrary to the idea that all beliefs are simply
“overdetermined” by our desires. Belief and desire interact, but
this does not mean that they are simply synonymous or that the
one is reducible to the other: desires typically imply certain beliefs,
but the fact of having a certain belief does not imply desire in the
same way. Consider as well some of the differences between desires
and intentions. Having formed an intention effectively to do
something at the present moment is not the same thing as, or reducible to, having a desire to do this thing. For example, I can have

a strong desire to do something without having yet formed the
intention to act on that desire. Indeed, we do not in fact act on all
of our desires, nor do we even intend to act on all of them. These

remarks only begin to suggest the complexity of our usage of notions of desire, belief, and intention, but they should suffice to re-

veal the inadequacy of any account in which all of the explanatory
weight is placed on any one of these terms.
If these arguments are accepted, what becomes of Girard’s critique of the “psychology of the subject,” with its excessive confidence in the role of the unified and masterly ego? Does an insistence On an intentionalist psychology imply a return to the
much-despised category of the subject? I think not. Particular
agents and collections of them can be identified in terms that make
no claims whatsoever about the unity and autonomy ofconsciousness, or the Subject in some strong, idealist sense.*° It is then possible to proceed to the task of analyzing such agents within the
framework of attitude psychology. Reference to states of belief,
desire, and intention need not engage us in any unwanted assumptions about the agent’s lucidity, mastery, self-knowledge, ideal rationality, perfect coherence across time, identity, and so on. Moreover, in discussing the ways in which mimetic desire is related to

beliefs, we may adopt a fairly common distinction between two
different ways of ascribing mental states to an agent. One kind of

29 - Approaches to Mimetic Desire

ascription is dispositional: here it is a matter, for example, of propositions that a particular agent is disposed to believe, without it
being assumed that this agent is aware of all of these beliefs at any
particular moment. The second type of belief ascription is a matter
of attributing a focal or “occurrent” belief to the agent, who is said
to have a particular belief at a given time, in the sense that this
belief corresponds to what the agent is consciously thinking or
aware of at that point in time.%7 This distinction is important in
the context of an analysis of mimetic desire. If, as I shall argue at
greater length below, mimetic desire is a type of desire that
emerges in interaction with certain kinds of beliefs, it is important
to understand that the beliefs in question need not always be focal
to have a role within the agent’s motivational processes and that an
emphasis on the agent’s intentionality does not wed us to some
overly rationalistic model of human beings. To stress a point that I
made earlier, the psychology of propositional attitudes is not reducible to a phenomenology of consciousness based on “qualia” or
the notion of “what it feels like.”38
I have just argued that the theory of mimetic desire belongs
within an intentionalist psychology where states of desire (and
other motivational processes) would be held to interact with be-

liefs and other attitudes in the explanation of behavior. Thus I shall
not be asking how Girard’s insights concerning imitation overturn
or completely replace everyday psychology, but how these insights
may be put to work in improving our typical intentional explanations and understandings of people’s behavior. In support of this
claim, I point to Girard’s own consistent reliance on the language
and assumptions of such a psychology, as well as to various other
independent reasons why this is the only viable direction in which
the mimetic theory could be developed.*? I develop such arguments in the next chapter. Yet Girard’s readers will know that there
is one aspect of his work that would seem to fit in poorly with the
kind of psychological framework that the present reconstruction is
advocating, namely, his emphasis on a primitive, nonrepresenta-

tional form of mimesis. A discussion of that tendency in Girard’s
work will allow me to articulate my understanding of his various
concepts of mimesis in much greater detail, for as I said earlier, it is

30 - Models of Desire

not the case that Girard works with only a single concept of imitation. In chapter 4, I return to this issue and discuss the primitive

form of mimesis that should be distinguished from the concept of
mimetic desire. But first I turn in the next chapter to the problem
of identifying some of the basic elements of a minimal definition of
mimetic desire.

Chapter Two

Elements of

Mimetic Desire

From Desire to Mimetic Desire

What are the differences between desire and mimetic desire? If
mimetic desire is desire “according to the other,” it would seem
obvious that a first factor that must be added to the elementary
situation of desiring in order to characterize a basic episode of
mimetic desire would be the desiring agent’s belief that someone
else desires something. Thus Girard writes: “At the origin of a
desire there is always the spectacle of another real or illusory desire” (DDN 105/124). We may refer to that someone else as “the
model,” but it will be useful later on to introduce the notion of the

“mediator” as well. It is important to emphasize Girard’s stipulation that the desiring agent’s belief about the model can be false.
The belief about the model may not refer truthfully to any real
agent, or in cases where this belief does refer to an existing agent, it
may not refer truthfully to this agent’s states of desire. The agent of
desire may wrongly believe that the model wishes to acquire or
maintain a purely imaginary social distinction, and may mimetically desire the same thing.
Although there must be a belief to the effect that the model has
a certain desire, the mimetic agent need not make any direct comparison between his or her own desires and the other's. The latter
stipulation is included because the theory of mimetic desire must
allow for two rather different possibilities: on the one hand, cases
31

32 - Models of Desire

in which the desiring agent does not believe that his or her desires
are oriented by beliefs about a model’s desires; on the other hand,
cases in which there is such a belief. We do not want to stipulate
that the desiring agent necessarily believes that his or her own desire and the model’s desire are the same.
More explicitly, a first difference between mimetic and other
states of desire is that in the former, the emergence of desire is
linked to the agent’s holding of a belief belonging to a certain class.
These beliefs may be labeled the mimetic agent’s “attributions of
desire,” as it is a matter of the desiring agent attributing a state of
desire to some “model.” But what is a model? First of all, the

model figures in the beliefs of the desiring agent. We assume that
the individuals, relations, situations, and events figuring as the

contents of mental attitudes may or may not refer accurately to a
real state of affairs or course of events (the model could be supernatural, nonexistent, a collective or composite subject, a memory
or phantasy of the agent’s former self—the latter case being especially important, for example, in Proust’s writings). We do not
even want to stipulate that the desiring agent necessarily believes
in the literal reality of the model. It is possible that a mimetic agent
could know very well that the model is a fictional character and
that the novelistic events never literally took place and yet believe
that events of the sort evoked by the story either could or should
transpire and be inspired to desire “according to” the fictional
other.
So far I have required the mimetic agent to have a belief about a
model and about that model’s desire. Yet the mimetic agent’s own
desire for the object must somehow be linked more firmly to the
belief that the model desires it. The issues can be clarified by means
of a schematic illustration. Suppose we have the following situation. An agent, A, has had, just prior to a point in time, t, at least
four beliefs, namely, beliefs to the effect that

. some other agent B desires S,
. some other agent B desires S’,
. some other agent C desires S, and
HN
PW
. some other agent D desires S”

33 - Elements ofMimetic Desire
(where S, S’, and S” designate significantly different kinds of situations desired). Now, suppose that we want to declare that at t,
agent A has a mimetic desire for S, and that (1) was the attribution
of desire that played the crucial role in the formation of A’s mi-

metic desire for S. Wnat makes B a model for A’s desire for S? This
is the problem of motivating the desire-belief link in the basic mimetic episode, for we want to specify that the belief plays an effective role in the generation of desire, and we want to say under what
conditions this would typically take place.
The point to grasp here is that it is not necessarily the case that
someone only has one other person in mind and can only conceive
of one desire that this person has. To say, however, that someone

desires a specific something “according to” the desire of a particular person is to stipulate that one particular model concept, and
one particular attribution of desire, was linked to (or indeed generated) the imitative desire that emerged. In the example sketched
above, this means that A desires S because A believed (1), and not
because A believed (3), although the latter could also generate a
mimetic desire for S. Also, A’s mimetic relation to model B could

also have contributed to the creation of a situation where A desires
S’ mimetically. How is the process where (1) plays an effective
role, and the others do not, determined? What conditions would

typically tend to exclude the other possibilities? Why doesn’t A’s
belief (4) lead A to have a mimetic desire for S’’?
A literary example may be used to illustrate this problem. In Le
Rouge et le now, Julien Sorel attends a ball, and as he moves slowly

through the crowd that throngs the salon of the magnificent hdtel
de Retz where the ball is being held, all of the fashionable young
men around him are exchanging words of praise for a single
woman, who is proclaimed by one of them to be the “queen of the
ball.” There seems to be a total unanimity that Mademoiselle de La
Mole’s coquettish charms are infinitely superior to those of all of
the other women, and so much so that “only a prince” could be
worthy of the “sublime Mathilde.” Yet Julien is not convinced. He

experiences no desire for Mathilde at this point in the story, in
spite of the fact that he is highly aware of the other men’s unanimous and avid desire for her. Instead of hearing their praise of

34 - Models of Desire

Mathilde and then suddenly succumbing to an overpowering
mimetic desire for her, he merely thinks to himself, “Since these

puppets find her so remarkable, she merits being studied. I will
understand what these people take perfection to be.”! Why, then,
does the “spectacle” of the young men’s desire fail to awaken
Julien’s passion? Why does he not spend the rest of the evening
pursuing her? (Instead, bored with everyone else, she follows him
around, trying to overhear his conversations.) The most obvious
way to respond to this question is to emphasize Julien’s comment
that those who voice their admiration for Mathilde are “puppets.”
They are not models for his desire, either individually or collectively, because he lacks the requisite kind of beliefs about them and
indeed holds their preferences in contempt, as something to be
studied in the manner of a sociologist studying the alien ideology
of some strange class of people.
When we apply this insight to our analytic schema, this means
that we must start adding in further stipulations about agent A’s
beliefs concerning agents B, C, and D. Perhaps some features of
what A thinks about B make the latter into a model; given other
circumstances, the agent’s beliefs about D would have led to a desire for S’’, in spite of the fact that two others were thought to
desire S. So we rephrase our question as a question about the difference, for the desiring agent, between any number of beliefs
about other agents’ desires and the kind of belief that serves as a
belief about a model ofdesire. What makes the difference? The most
plausible approach to this difference is based on the assumption
that the content of some kind of additional belief, or set of beliefs,

is what serves to make an agent into a model for some desiring
agent (which is not the same as saying that the agent must foreground the idea that the other “is a model”).
In what follows, I will call these beliefs “tutelary beliefs,” my

goal being to specify their function and typical contents in episodes of mimetic desire. This approach corresponds to at least
some of Girard’s views on the problem. First of all, his analyses
consistently presuppose—when they do not state outright—the
idea that it is the imitator’s beliefs about the model that in one way
or another qualify the model as model in the imitator’s mind. This

35 - Elements ofMimetic Desire
point is rather obvious; to present but a single example, we may
cite the following: “[The disciple] admires and respects the model;
if he had not done so, he would hardly have chosen him as model
in the first place” (TH 290/315). Girard is eloquent about the
many things that a model can represent to those who are in the
grips of mimetic desire. In their eyes, the model has a godlike quality and appears to be a unique and superb source of orientation. In
many of Girard’s descriptions of the inception of a mimetic desire,
it is clearly the prestige that surrounds the model that leads to the
‘first “selection” of this person as a source of desires to be imitated.

If this much is accepted, a crucial outstanding question concerns the viability of subsuming such beliefs beneath a single
rubric. This was precisely what was done in each of the basic approaches to mimetic desire surveyed in chapter 1, where in each
case a single quality or characteristic of the model was made the
basis of the “fundamental” mimetic orientation. Yet in my view,
each of those approaches restricted the content of the tutelary beliefs in an unrealistic manner. Here we encounter the difficulty of
keeping the concept of tutelary beliefs from betraying the explanatory value of the model. For example, one could suppose that the

agent’s mimetic orientation makes perfect sense once we realize
that agent A thinks that B embodies Sei, while A reckons poor C
and D among the lowly Sezendes! Isn’t A’s choice obvious in the
light of such a belief? The example shows that in some applications, this approach can slide into interpretations of mimetic desire that obscure the very real differences between particular manifestations of the phenomenon. By this I mean to say that it does

not seem like a good idea to attribute to all mimetic agents a belief
(or set of beliefs) having an essentially philosophical content. In
my view, the mimetic hypothesis should not attribute to everyone
a single essential desire underlying all actual states of desire. It is
reductive and dogmatic to assert that the ultimate object of all desires is some philosophical object such as “the Good,” “Being,”

“autonomy,” “spontaneity,” or “originality” or some psychoanalytical object such as “the mother,” “the breast,” “primary narcissism,” “care-taking,” or “the phallus.” The mimetic hypothesis
might also include the rationally mimetic economic agent studied

36 - Models of Desire

by Orléan, an agent that has the most minimal tutelary beliefs
about the model: the agent only wagers that it may be pragmatically useful to follow a particular model’s example, without really
believing that this model has truly superior knowledge or being.?
Girard himself tended for a long time to adopt a “philosophical” approach to this issue insofar as he privileged an existentialist
way of talking about the imitator’s beliefs about the model. The
imitator was consistently cast as the subject of “ontological sickness,” which meant that the person prone to mimetic or “metaphysical” desire was thought to be driven by a hopeless quest for
“being.” Yet some of Girard’s other statements break with this tendency and emphasize instead the diversity of the contents of tutelary belief. For example, a passage that refers to the “metaphysical”
and “ontological” dimensions of desire goes on to explain this
usage as follows:
By invoking the notion of metaphysical desire, I am not in any way giving
in to metaphysics. To understand this notion, we have only to look at the
kinship between the mimetic structure we have discussed and the part
played by notions such as honour or prestige in certain types of rivalry
that are regulated by society: duels, sporting competitions, etc. These notions are in fact created by the rivalry; they have no tangible reality whatsoever. Yet the very fact that there is a rivalry involving them makes them
appear to be more real than any real object. (TH 296—97/321)

In this and many other contexts, Girard insists on the illusory nature of the imitator’s beliefs about the model, but he does not as-

sert that any one master term can sufficiently characterize the sum
total of these beliefs. The word “prestige” in its multiple senses
sometimes replaces the previous insistence on the belief in the
model’s superior “being” and “self-sufficiency.” Yet it should also
be observed that in a recent publication, Girard explicitly embraces the earlier terminology of “metaphysical” desire: “Words
like ‘being’ and ‘ontological seem pompously philosophical in the
context of flighty adolescents, yet they cannot be avoided. Being is
what mimetic desire is really after” (TE 43).
In my view, the basic approach that involves an emphasis on the

37 - Elements ofMimetic Desire
role of the imitator’s beliefs about the model is correct. However,

this approach must be applied carefully, which means avoiding a
tendency to limit the belief in question to a content that is in fact
only appropriate to one particular cultural context or to one aspect
of mimetic desire. A theory of mimetic desire is necessarily committed to making claims about the typical orientations of mimetic
agents, but if this theory is to have a broad descriptive scope, as
well as a genuine explanatory capacity, these claims must be very
carefully construed. The problem with the interpretations of the
“essence of homo mimeticus discussed in chapter 1 is that they fail in
this task by insisting on one historically specific type of motivational orientation (¢.g., certain social scientific conceptions of rationality, the romantic individualist’s concern with spontaneity,

the existentialist’s interest in Being, and a strangely pessimistic
Hegelianism). Clearly it will not do to furnish our agent with a
precise set of preferences about the possible objects of desire, as in
the utilitarian picture of the imitator. The specificity and interest
of the concept of mimetic desire reside precisely in not equipping
the human motivational system with a preestablished program
that specifies in detail a set of preferred states, built-in systems of

“rewards” and “incentives,” or an overarching mechanism that es-

tablishes incentives through “reinforcement.” A utility-driven imitation may very well have its own sphere of pertinence but should
be kept separate from the notion of mimetic desire, which is different insofar as it identifies an essentially comparative formation of
desire and not simply another orientation toward an item in a list
of possible goals that range from the satisfaction of basic appetites
to a sense of self-efficacy.
But what of the strategy that consists in equipping the mimetic

agent with some criteria for the “choice” of the model? A fully intentional choice is clearly ruled out: the agent does not form an
intention to pick a particular model. We do not want to propose
that the determination of the model is necessarily the result of a
focal inferential process, yet beliefs about the potential models
could still figure among the necessary conditions for the activation
of a process that results in the effective selection of a model, a selec-

tion that is implicit in the fact that the agent desires in one way and

38 - Models of Desire

not another. But here we encounter our question once more: what
would those beliefs be?

Tutelary Beliefs
In attempting to answer the question of the nature of tutelary belief, one becomes acutely aware of the problem of the psychological theory’s relation to the specificities of particular historical formations and personal histories. How is it possible to arrive at a
conception that is flexible enough to be able to correspond to the
diversity of specific beliefs that may effectively motivate one agent
to adopt another agent, or a concept of another agent, as a model?
In some cases, such words as “reverence,” “esteem,” and “admiration” seem appropriate; in others, “attractiveness,” “seduction,”

and “power” would be more likely to describe the operative beliefs; in others still, the actual beliefs would involve notions of

“purity” or “saintliness.” There are simply many specific kinds of
beliefs involved when people come to have a deep confidence in
some model’s “superiority,” or perhaps more generally, in the kind
of hierarchical difference that is often described by Western novelists and by Girard himself as idolatry or as “deviated transcendence.”
One aspect of the issue can be clarified by examining a distinction proposed by some attribution theorists in empirical social
psychology. I have in mind the distinction between “entity attribution” and cases where another person’s preferences are viewed
as merely subjective opinions. Following this jargon, if I think
your preference for a certain variety of whiskey is peculiar to your
own strange taste buds, then this is not a case of “entity attribution.” The latter term would be used if I thought, on the contrary,
that you had discerned some objective qualities of the drink. Does
it help to say, then, that mimetic desiring involves so-called entity
attribution? The idea would be that the mimetic model’s preferences are not viewed by the mimetic agent as merely “subjective”
or relative. Thus the attribution in question involves a belief about
the model’s ability to identify objective truths, such as which state
of affairs is truly worthy of preference. Thus we could conjecture

39 - Elements of Mimetic Desire

that in many cases, the tutelary belief would involve the mimetic
agent’s view that the model’s desire corresponds to an “intrinsically superior choice.” Or again, the abstract statement would be
that the model is the agent who is thought to know the “true
value” of things. Yet this assumption may not be appropriate in all
contexts: we can imagine imitators who are fairly cynical about the
truth of their model’s choices but not about other features of the
model’s superiority. For example, I might not think that your preference for this brand of whiskey is grounded in objective proper~ties of the drink, but I might deem your overall style to be quite
genuine and admirable, so I might want to drink the same sour
mash whiskey that you do. Insofar as this kind of example seems
plausible, the implication is that we do not want to include the
notion of intrinsic value as a necessary part of the belief about the
model. Also, to the extent that a particular model, serves over time
as a consistent mediator for an individual agent, the agent’s relation to this mediator could very well involve an attachment to the
perceived individuality and singularity of the mediator. The mediator’s judgments are valued as unique, creative, different, but not

necessarily as “true” or intrinsically right.
To restate the problem, we want to say that the imitator’s belief
about the model’s desire plays a crucial role in the motivation of the
mimetic agent’s own state of desire. We also want to say that this can
only be true when another condition is satisfied, namely, that the

imitator has a tutelary belief that helps to motivate the nondeliberate selection of the model, perhaps in a nonconscious inferential
process. As the nature of this tutelary belief is highly contextbound and involves reference to cultural and personal histories,

it is difficult to give a precise and abstractive characterization of
its essential contents. Yet if nothing is said to characterize those
contents, the notion is vacuous and the explanation runs in a circle: What motivates the selection of the model? Tutelary beliefs.
Which beliefs are tutelary? Those that motivate the selection of
the model.
One negative stipulation of the contents of tutelary belief runs
as follows. Roughly, it is a matter of adding in a “not-imitatingmy-desire” clause: if anagent A believes that agent B’s desire for S

40 + Models of Desire
is a mimetic desire for which A is the model, then B cannot be A’s

model for a desire for S. Note that this clause does not say that A
could not end up desiring S by other means. Nor does it say that
A must believe that B’s desire is fully “spontaneous” or “autonomous” (e.g., agent A believes that B embodies a case of realized
narcissism). In some cultures, that a master himself had a master 1s
no disqualification in the disciple’s eyes; what the disciple will not

accept is a master who takes him as master. It should be noted that
the clause does not rule out reciprocal modeling or double mediation, that is, cases where A is the model for a B who also happens to

be A’s model. The clause in question does imply that the latter phenomena will involve significant constraints on the agents’ awareness of their real situation, but this is what we want in the model. I

return to these patterns of mimetic interaction in chapter 3.

Yet as I have already said, the “not-imitating-my-desire” clause
is only a negative condition and does not adequately characterize
tutelary beliefs. Let us explore some possible schematic formula-

tions of the latter. Tutelary beliefs could typically take the following form, where M stands for the model:
(1) M knows which x is the best (or a superior) kind of X.

This is the version just evoked in the discussion of psychologists’
“entity attributions,” and I suggested that it was overly restrictive.
One can imitate a model’s desires without believing that this person really has the kind of knowledge that (1) attributes to that person. Perhaps the following version would be less restrictive:
(2) M knows which x will (typically) yield y.

Here the agent’s tutelary belief attributes to the model what is essentially knowledge of aproduction rule: to get y, do x. This sort
of basis for imitation has been strongly emphasized by a number of
theorists, and it is a central intuition of the “social cognitive the-

ory” proposed by Albert Bandura.* The main idea is that of a “utilitarian imitator,” for whom

imitation is a means

to an end.

Equipped with a set of preferences and incentives, this agent ob-

41 - Elements of Mimetic Desire

serves the consequences of others’ actions and then copies those
actions that result in outcomes that he or she deems rewarding.
This is often a highly successful strategy because watching others
and then engaging in selective imitation allows the agent to learn
without engaging in a costly process of trial and error. Utilitarian
imitators already know what they want, and what they seek in
observing others is know-how linked to particular rewards and to
a general goal of self-efficacy. It seems clear to me that Girard’s
analyses of mimetic desire are not based on these assumptions.
-Whereas Bandura equips his agent with a motivational system that
then serves to prompt imitation along with other forms of behavior, Girard explores a way in which imitation influences motivation. Bandura’s imitator has certain desires but is uncertain how to
satisfy them; Girard’s mimetic agent is uncertain what to desire,
but this uncertainty 1s conjoined with a tendency to believe in the
certainty and self-directness possessed by some other agent. Thus
in Girard’s hypothesis, the social rewards serving as the implicit
and explicit goals of a mimetic relation to a model are not secondary to some other set of rewards or incentives already sought by
the agent. The orientation toward the other is secondary in Bandura’s theory, and it follows that an agent who already possesses
sufficient know-how and self-efficacy would no longer imitate a
model. In Girard’s view, the orientation toward the other is pri-

mary, and even the goal of self-efficacy is ultimately understood as
a particular stance taken in relation to others.
Formula 2, then, corresponds to Bandura’s approach, because
the tutelary belief focuses the agent’s interest on the particular
task, not on the model’s personal qualities. To transform this particular case into a very general tutelary belief about the “prestige”
of a particular model, one might alter (2) to yield the following
variant:
(2’) Mis the person who knows, and can successfully use, an effective means to ends of type Y.

So when the imitator wants to get a particular something, he or
she thinks of M and does what he or she thinks M would do in that

42, - Models of Desire

situation, because M is perceived as being generally effective in
this domain of activity (and perhaps others). This sort of formula
may express a genuine insight into the kind of attitude that helps
people to single out someone to imitate on some occasions, but it
seems to me that that insight is not a particularly Girardian one. To
see why, one need only reflect that the Girardian imitator does not
already know what specific ends he or she wants to achieve and
hence does not merely survey the world of others in search for
someone who displays the requisite skills. What the Girardian imitator wants is not only a way to achieve certain ends but a model
of what is worth doing and pursuing. In Weberian jargon, the
agent of mimetic desire is engaged in Wertrationalitdt and a form
of charismatic authority, and not just Zweckrationalitat. To account for the difference, one might propose the following typical
schema for a tutelary belief:
(3) M is someone who knows what ends are worth pursuing.

Yet (3) brings us back in the direction of a tautologous formulation of the contents of tutelary beliefs: tutelary beliefs are beliefs
that inform the believer that someone’s desires are worth copying.

But such beliefs seem rather uninformative if their content is
nothing more than (3). Yet the basic idea does have a Girardian
flavor, and that is why many of the attempts to specify the orientations of homo mimeticus insist on the model’s general prestige, not
on his or her particular doings and competencies. What matters is
not what the model is thought to do or to know but what the
model “is,” which when said rather bluntly renders the “metaphysical” understanding of the source of mimetic desire:
(4) M has the Being I lack.

I have already objected that this approach wrongly transforms all
those who are under the sway of mimetic desire into existential
philosophers. Although such a formula describes a relation between two agents, it lacks a dimension that is crucial, in my view,

43 - Elements ofMimetic Desire

to the mimetic intuition. What is needed is better captured by the
following formula:
(5) Mis the kind of person I would like to be.

Tutelary beliefs, then, presuppose and are filled in by beliefs in the
existence of kinds of persons that are at least implicitly and partially ranked in the mind of the mimetic agent. Some of these kinds
will correspond to culturally designated “roles” or types (e.g., the
chivalrous knight, the dandy, etc.); others will be more idiosyncratic composites of such types. The agent adopts the model’s desires in order to become the kind of person the model is perceived
to be, the assumption being that the individual in question is a
sufficiently good, if not the best or the only, example of the type.
But is there not a regression here? How does one get one’s general

idea of which kind of person one wants to emulate, and how is it
determined that a particular individual has the necessary traits?
The negative clause proposed above (“not-imitating-my-desire”)
is a partial response to that question: I do not want to be the kind
of person who would imitate me. Conversely, I might want to be
the kind of person who is indifferent to me. Other ways of supporting a belief of type (5) would point to the various kinds of
evidence that one could have, in particular sociocultural contexts,

of an individual’s embodiment of the virtue or distinction required
by the kind in question. In other words, we attach to (5) another
explanatory clause:
(5') Mis the kind of person I would like to be, because M is q, has
r, knows s, and has t, where q, r, s, and t are typical characteris-

tics of a superior social kind.

The variables would be filled in with whatever people take to be
the tangible signs of the model’s superiority: high birth, wealth,
beauty, manifestations of passion or fervor, evidence of individual
well-being, unique talents or exploits, enjoyment of admiration or
popularity, and so on. The particular tutelary belief that fills in (5)

44. - Models of Desire

would be supported, then, by a chain or cluster of other beliefs and
perceptions that, in the context, appear to justify and confirm it. A

crucial point implicit in (5) and (5’) is the idea that the desiring

agent does not already believe himself or herself to equal the model
in the embodiment of the virtue or distinction in question: the
model is the kind of person I would like to be, implying that I am not
now such a person, my proof being that I lack some or all of the
attributes listed. The tutelary belief involves the agent’s awareness
that the model possesses—at least for the moment—a hierarchical
difference in relation to the agent. One might also add that typically the agent also believes that the model has this same superiority in relation to some significant set of others, if not in relation
to everyone.
Perhaps reference to a literary illustration will make these abstractions appear somewhat less lifeless. Julien Sorel, I noted, does

not imitate the desires of the young “puppets” at the ball. Although these young men all objectively enjoy a superior social status in relation to M. de La Mole’s secretary, the fact that Julien

does not presently believe this social difference has any “substance” means that it does not suffice to make these men his models. They may outrank him in some public scale of status, but they
are just puppets and he has no desire to become like them. In order
to see what is required to change the situation, it would be informative to turn to a case where Julien’s beliefs about another person

do qualify that person as a model for him. Examples are easy to
find. For example, one paragraph explicitly tells us why Julien is
fascinated by the chevalier de Beauvoisis, so much so that he “almost courts him.” The key phrases run as follows: “The combination of self-respect, mysterious importance, and youthful fatuousness enchanted him. For example the chevalier stammered a bit
because he had had the honor of spending a lot of time with a very
noble man who had this defect. Julien had never found united in a

single being an amusing ridiculousness and a perfection of those
manners that a poor provincial fellow must try to imitate.”5
Julien lacks the status enjoyed by de Beauvoisis and knows it.
He knows that in order to justify being associated with Julien, de
Beauvoisis has circulated the rumor that Julien is actually the fils

45 - Elements ofMimetic Desire

naturel of an intimate friend of the great M. de la Mole—and not
merely the son of a provincial carpenter. In Julien’s mind, evidence
of the chevalier’s external social distinction combines with a perception of his unique personal qualities, a mixture of perfect aristocratic manners, self-esteem, and /e ridicule. The latter may seem

incongruous as a quality capable of motivating Julien’s admiration
but should be understood as contrasting in Julien’s mind with his
acute sense of his own social vulnerability: while Julien knows that
he must himself constantly anticipate the thoughts of others and
avoid appearing ridiculous, he imagines that the chevalier’s distinction and self-esteem are so secure that he can permit himself to
be ridiculous, even fatuous. What is more, the chevalier’s self-love

is such that he can display, and not hide, a fatuous imitation of the
defect of a great man. In this case, there is no clause to the effect

that the model must be perceived as being strictly nonimitative;
only if the chevalier were to imitate Julien, or other inferiors,

would his mimicry be perceived as a flaw potentially serious
enough to disqualify him as a model. Finally, the chevalier’s manifest attitude toward Julien combines interesting features: he displays his sense of his own social superiority by letting Julien know
that he will only associate with him after having circulated a lie
about Julien’s birth, but at the same time, this very lie holds out the

possibility of Julien’s social advancement, an advancement that
Julien passionately desires. Clearly, the particular episode of mimetic desire in which Julien imitates the chevalier is part of the

larger history of Julien Sorel’s ambition. By pointing to the role
that the tutelary belief plays in identifying the chevalier as a model
for him, I do not presume to have explained Julien’s motives ab ovo.
For this episode of mimetic desire to be possible, Julien has to be
equipped with any number of preferences, values, longings, and

ideas. We know, for example, that none of the priestly models that
he has had ample occasion to observe was ever shrouded in the
kind of tutelary beliefs that he is capable of holding in regard to
other kinds of individuals— beginning with his youthful infatuation with the image of Napoleon. That Napoleon should emerge
as the salient model for an ambitious young man in Julien’s context
and social situation is hardly mysterious, but why is he ambitious?

46 - Models of Desire

Why does he dream and read instead of working diligently at the
factory? There will be questions “upstream” of any mimetic episode, some of which may be difficult to answer. But this should not
be taken to imply that the notions introduced above can have no
genuine explanatory value when applied to a particular situation
“downstream.”© We are not after a covering law for agents’ individual global trajectories, and it is hardly surprising that we find
no context-free formula that explains why an individual has come
to hold one set of tutelary beliefs and not another. (I return to this
topic in chapter 5.)
Does (5’) constitute an adequate, albeit blank, description of
the most general and typical form of a tutelary belief? The key assumption would seem to be that people believe there are different
kinds of people; moreover, people believe there are hierarchical
differences between these kinds. Furthermore, it is assumed that

people sometimes do not consider themselves to belong to the
kind they “would like to” and that they find themselves taking a
special interest in those who do. Mimetic desire would then seem
to be this fixation on a model whose desires are thought to manifest a hierarchical difference between self and other. The specific
nature of this difference, however, and the qualities and actions
that embody it vary massively from context to context. One can
easily imagine a situation in which imitating the stammer of an
older man would disqualify someone from being worthy of imitation. Consequently, in any particular explanation of a case of mimetic desire, the blank formulation of the tutelary belief would
have to be filled in with a more detailed and fine-grained description of the contents of the beliefs and desires. Yet in the process,

additional complexities not yet hinted at will be encountered.

“Cet obscur objet du désir”

Above I suggested in passing that the semantic content of a desire
(its “object”) can be characterized as a situation, that is, as the state
of affairs that, if it were to become actual, would satisfy the desire.”

Thus at a particular point in the story, Julien Sorel desires to have

47 - Elements of Mimetic Desire

Madame Rénal allow him to hold her hand as they sit and converse

with Madame Derville in the twilight. The content or object of his
desire is the situation where this is indeed what takes place. In this
example, the situation desired has various elements. Note that if
this situation is to become a fact, both Julien and Madame Rénal

must perform certain types of actions: Julien has to muster the
courage to undertake the bold and transgressive action of reaching
for her hand, and she must yield to this advance, and in a manner

that gives the physical contact a certain kind of significance. Ac‘cording to this manner of construing the “object of desire,” the
content of a desire 1s not “objectival” in the sense of involving primarily or in the first instance a physical or concrete object—the
“object” of Julien’s desire is not simply that the woman’s hand remain in his grasp, and one can easily imagine a Sartrean example in
which the hand would be momentarily surrendered but Julien
would nonetheless determine that the type of situation he desired
had not been realized. As the text indicates, Julien reckons that the

holding of hands must count as an advantage that he has acquired
for himself, which means that certain attitudes and dispositions on
the part of Madame Rénal figure as essential parts of the object of
Julien’s desire.8

The content of a desire, then, may be described as a situation,
and moreover, as the situation that would realize the desire should

this situation become actual. In describing the situation that specifies the content of a particular desire, we must take into account

the terms and viewpoint of the agent who has the desire. As
Dretske has usefully emphasized, attitudes of desire share something of the opacity that is typically associated with attitudes of
belief. Thus, although we know that Jocasta is the mother of Oedipus, the fact that Oedipus desires Jocasta does not warrant us to

draw the conclusion that Oedipus desires his mother. As soon as he
learns that Jocasta is his mother, Oedipus no longer desires her in

the same way, if he desires her at all.? In describing the objects of
desire, it is crucial to allow that an agent can desire, not one particular state of affairs, but a kind of state of affairs. In other words, in

speaking of types of situations as well as of particular situations, we
conceive of the desire’s content as an abstract schema or model that

48 - Models of Desire

may contain one or more variables. Thus it is not always a matter
of a desire of the sort “I desire to own this particular automobile
here and now.” There are also cases such as “I desire to own an
automobile someday,” or “I desire to own an automobile now,”
or “I desire that someone somewhere own an automobile.” As
Dretske puts it, “Our capacity to distinguish one object from another sets an upper limit on the kinds of objects that can be objects
of desire.”!° Similarly, if we wish to respect the opacity of desiring
attitudes, our attribution of the contents of desire must corre-

spond to the type of situation intended by the person who has the
desire.
For example, suppose someone is oblivious to the difference be-

tween Bordeaux and Burgundy wines: this person not only cannot
taste the difference between them but has never even heard of the
distinction and deems the different shapes of bottles arbitrary or
meaningless. Yet this person does think there is a difference between French wines in general and wines from other countries and
on a particular occasion in a restaurant wants to be served some
French wine. In such a case, we are right to ascribe to that person a

desire for French wine but not for a specific variety of French wine,
even though the wine that he or she consumes may turn out to be a
specific vintage, say, a Chateau Mille Secousses 1980. If I attributed to this person a desire for that particular bottle, I would get

the content of his or her desire wrong, just as I would be mistaken

if I said that the person desired any kind of wine whatsoever. With
this kind of example in view, Dretske suggests that a desire can be
satisfied by something that was not the object of desire.!! Thus,

although our uninformed restaurant goer was satisfied by the
Mille Secousses that the waiter served, it seems wrong to say that
this was the content ofhis desire. It could seem to follow from this
observation that it is a mistake to say that the content of a desire is
the situation that, if it became actual, would satisfy the desire. It

might be preferable, then, to say that the object of a desire is whatever would “realize” the desire, where “realize” refers to the be-

coming factual of the desire’s semantic content, the proviso being
that we define this situation in terms that attribute the degree of
particularity or discernment appropriate to the person and context

49 - Elements of Mimetic Desire

involved in this particular episode of desire. This point may seem
somewhat arcane to some readers, but I will now show that these

matters make a very real difference when we begin to analyze what
it means to say that one person conceives of a desire “according to”
another person’s desire.
What indeed is meant by the claim that in cases of “triangular
desire,” two people desire “the same thing”? A closer look reveals
some important ambiguities here. The problem can be clarified by
means of yet another schematic example. Let us suppose that an
‘agent, A, is disposed to desire mimetically in relation to another
agent, B, who is A’s model, which means that A has the right kind

of tutelary beliefs about B, namely, some belief that fills in (5')
above. Let us now assume that A and B are both members of a
committee. B is the present chairperson, but B’s term is up and
there must be a new appointment. According to the rules governing the organization in question, B is eligible for reappointment.
Now, A knows that B would like very much to be chairperson for
another term, and it is this knowledge that is going to play the role
of the mimetic agent’s attribution of desire in this particular instance of mimetic desire. In other words, A’s knowledge that B

wants to be the leader again is the belief that will have an effective
role in the formation of A’s desire. What, then, is the content of A’s

mimetically conceived desire? What situation would satisfy A’s desire? Does A desire the situation (a) where B is renamed chairperson of the committee, thereby satisfying B’s desire, or (0) where A
becomes chairperson of the committee, thereby thwarting B’s desire? Obviously if A desires (a) there could be cooperation between A and B, whereas if A desires (0), there is a potential for
conflict, if we assume that the rules stipulate that there cannot be a
sharing of the chairperson’s role.
Here we have a crucial issue for the theory: do we want to say
that both (a) and (4) correspond to examples of mimetic desire or
that only one of them does? It seems to me that we have to say both
if we are not going to restrict the scope of the theory severely.
Clearly, within actual cultural contexts (such as social systems having very stable hierarchical value schemes and institutions) there
are many examples of subordinates whose desires are, through a

50 - Models of Desire
process of modeling or social learning, formed in ways analogous
to (a). There is no compelling reason why a theory of mimetic
desire should rule them out as a matter of principle. Nor does there
seem to be any evidence for saying that even in such cases, a fundamental ambivalence toward the model is present—or that an emulative desire to supplant the model is lurking in the wings, being

somehow repressed more or less effectively. In that direction lies
psychodynamic theorizing, with its circular positing of unconscious aggressive drives, killer instincts, or a universal “will to
power.” But if these arguments are accepted, the often-discussed

tendency of mimetic desire to generate rivalry all of the time is put
in doubt; under a definition that embraces cases of both types (a)
and (4), mimetic desire does not necessarily or automatically generate rivalry or even a potential for it. It is not synonymous with
“emulation” or “the desire to surpass the model.”
What would seem to generate rivalry is a type of desire in which
the agent wants to appropriate for his or her own exclusive possession what the model is thought (or known) to desire in a similar
way. In my view, we want to say that this type of conflictual desire
is a subset of mimetic desire. Girard tends to stress the link between mimetic desire and rivalry, but he often refers to cases of
“external mediation,” where desire is at once mimetic and non-

competitive. The competitive subset of mimetic desire could be
specified in terms of a class of desires defined in terms of their content, that is, a set of types of situations that involve relations that

exclude any possible cooperative sharing or harmonious coincidence of goals between agent and model. In other words, if both A
and B desire an S that belongs to this class, then it is ruled out that
both A’s and B’s desires could be realized at the same time. Desires
belonging to this class are not externally imposed on the agent but
are generated by the specific mode in which the agent imitates the
model’s desire, a mode that can be labeled “emulative.” Moreover,

a subset of tutelary beliefs will correspond to this class of mimetic
desires. This possibility is allowed for in (5), “M is the kind of
person I would like to be,” for the fact that someone “would like”

something does not mean that he or she believes that the thing is
possible, or even that this particular want enjoys any motivational

51 - Elements ofMimetic Desire
priority. On the other hand, “would like to be” can read as “would
like and in fact hope to become.” The person in the grips of the
emulative variety of mimetic desire would like very much to become the kind of person exemplified by the model, and the ensuing
episodes of imitation typically are part of a project aimed at precisely that goal.
There is a moral here about the supposed “identity” of two
agents’ desires in a triangular situation.!2 An attitude of desire is
not in the third person; it is someone’s attitude toward a situation.
‘For that reason, it is not entirely accurate to say of B’s desire in our
example that its content 1s the situation where “B is renamed chairperson.” Instead, the situation in question involves a relation,
from B’s perspective, between B and a state of affairs. More accurately, the situation desired should be described as “I am renamed

chairperson,” with B speaking. The same insight must be applied
to our two different versions of A’s mimetic desire “according to”
B. The version in which what A wants is to supplant B as leader
clearly foregrounds A’s first-person relation to the object of desire,
which 1s described as “I become chairperson, supplanting B,” with
A speaking. In the version in which what A wants 1s to help B retain the post, the object of desire might best be described as “B
remains chairperson with my help.” Such remarks hardly seem illuminating, but they do serve to clarify what is meant by the “identity” of the objects of two agents’ desires. Being renamed chairper-

son and becoming chairperson for the first time are not identical
situations. Similarly, if B wants to see himself in the seat of power

for another year, and A wants to sit at the feet of an idolized leader,
is it really appropriate to speak of a strict “equivalence” of their
objects of desire? Obviously not. At most, one can speak of a similarity between the contents of A’s and B’s desires. What we can say
is that whether A’s mimicry of B’s desire is emulative or not, A still
desires a situation that is schematically similar to the situation desired by B. The two agents “anchor” this schema quite differently,
just as A can mimetically desire according to B’s desire in radically
divergent ways. But this schematic similarity does not entail an
equivalence of desires.
The issue becomes even more complex when we leave behind

52 - Models of Desire

the kind of relatively simple case that has just been evoked. For
example, in some cases we must consider the content of a mimetic
desire based on a desire that is embedded within another attitude
of desire, as in the following structure: Agent A mimetically desires some situation S “according to” agent B, where A believes
that what B desires is an S’, the content of which is that agent C
desire some S". Is the content of A’s desire S “equivalent to,” or
only schematically patterned after, the contents of S’ or S$"? Examples can be conceived of where the appropriate response varies. For
example, B is in love with C and desires that C have some desire in
which B figures: B wants C to want B to invite her out. Taking B as
model, A in turn conceives of a desire for C, but the content of this
mimetic desire, S, could in some cases be rather different from that

of B’s desire S': A wants C to want A—and not B—to invite her
out. But what of the kind of “voyeuristic” mimetic desire of a Pandarus (which Girard has sometimes discussed)? Here A would mimetically desire that B’s desire for S’ be satisfied, which would

mean that A would indeed want C to desire what B wanted her to
desire, so that the contents of the embedded desires in S and in S’

would be equivalent. Yet surely A’s desire for S and B’s desire for S'
are not of the same type! We can also imagine cases where the contents of both the embedded desire and the attribution of desire
would be of the same type. For example, B desires S’, the content
of which is that C want to wear a certain dress, and A mimetically
desires S, the content of which is that she want to wear that dress.

Additional complexities would be introduced in cases where the
content of C’s desire in S"’ includes essential reference to the desires of B or A.18
There is a more general lesson here about the puzzling question

of the contents of attitudes of desire. The necessity of emphasizing
the desiring agent’s beliefs about the model’s desires should not
be misunderstood as a way of detaching the processes of mimetic
desire from all forms of concrete interaction, thereby making the
concept part of a purely individualistic psychology. When the
agent’s concept of a model is actually of a real agent, the relation
between the agent’s attitudes and those of this agent must be taken
into account 1n providing an adequate description of the mimetic

53 - Elements ofMimetic Desire
episode. Although it would simplify matters greatly if we could do
SO, it is not a good idea to equate the mimetic agent’s beliefs and
desires with external states of affairs; nor is it wise to divorce them

from external situations entirely. Instead, we must describe the
very complex relations that may obtain between the two, relations

that sometimes recall those of the metamorphic thieves in Dante’s
Inferno: “due e nessun Pimagine perversa parea [both and neither
the perverse image seemed]” (25.77—78). Strictly speaking, the
contents of the model’s and imitator’s desires are not equivalent
“because even when the mimetic agent actually knows what the
model really desires, the agent’s mimetic desire transforms and
adapts its contents to that agent’s own situation. Girard relies on
this nonequivalence of the situations desired whenever he discusses emulative desire: X’s desire to steal Y’s seat is never “equivalent” to Y’s desire to keep his seat. I have argued that the transformation need not have a conflictual or rivalrous orientation: X’s
desire to help Y keep his seat is also schematically similar, but not
equivalent, to Y’s desire to keep his seat.!4
To drive this point home, let us examine Girard’s discussion of
what he presents as a fairly common mimetic configuration. Two
young people do not manage to declare their mutual love because
both sense that it is dangerous to be the first to do so. Why? Girard
writes:
The desire that speaks first puts itself on display and, as a result, can become a mimetic model for the desire that has not yet spoken. The displayed desire runs the risk of being copied rather than reciprocated. In
order to desire someone who desires us, we must not imitate the offered

desire, we must reciprocate it, which is vastly different. . . . If Benedick
spoke first and Beatrice took his desire as a model, she might reorient her
desire toward herself in imitation of Benedick’s desire; she would prefer

herself to him. (TE 80-81)

Here the feared “copying” of desire to which Girard refers does
not involve anything like a simple equivalence of the two situations desired. When someone hears another person say “I love
you” and translates this into “I love myself,” the “copy” is unfaith-

54 + Models of Desire

ful. Girard seems to be reasoning that the anticipated danger resides in a “copying” that in fact transforms the content of Benedick’s utterance, extracting from his “I love you” something like “T
believe you desirable,” which, when given an egotistical twist by
Beatrice, becomes a source of self-love. In another plausible case,

such an utterance might be interpreted as evidence of the speaker’s
lack of good judgment and hence as a reason for not reciprocating.
But in neither of these two cases would it be a matter of a faithful
copying or imitation of the initial desire—unless, of course, that
initial desire is not a desire for reciprocal affection but something
predatory, such as the desire to make an erotic conquest. The dan-

ger that Beatrice may “prefer herself” stands prior, then, to any
danger that she may tendentiously “copy” or exploit Benedick’s declaration. Imitation may exacerbate romantic rivalry, but it does
not generate it ex ni/ilo or convert two desires for mutual love into
two desires for conquest. The young lovers’ hesitation 1s more simply explained by pointing out that both of them are uncertain
about the other’s response and are afraid that a declaration will not
be reciprocated, which could happen for any number of reasons
having nothing to do with the fact or timing of the utterance.
Also, it is important to keep in view the possibility of a happier
scenario. If in saying “I love you,” what Benedick expresses is his
desire for a situation in which he and Beatrice enjoy their mutual
love, then the copying of that desire by Beatrice is hardly to be
feared by him. She might very well hear his declaration and then
express her own desire for a romantic union. If he has good reason
to think her inclinations lie in that direction, he need not withhold

his declaration. He might even reckon that when suitably made,
his declaration could help to inspire in her a desire for romantic
reciprocity. These sorts of events may be rare in the great literary
texts, but they can be observed from time to time in the world.

Internal and External Mediation

In the preceding discussion, I tried to avoid translating Girard’s
basic intuition into termis appropriate to only one type of back-

55 - Elements ofMimetic Desire

ground of sociocultural beliefs and practices, or again, to one kind
of personality formation or deep-seated existential attitude. Even
the apparently schematic “means-end” rationality framework of
utilitarian psychology is an overly limited approach to the diversity of the phenomena with which mimetic desire may be associated. What Is precisely interesting and promising about the concept of mimetic desire is the plasticity or flexibility it allows one to
attain in the description of a motivational system that remains
_Open to contextual determinations. At the same time, however,

the theory of mimetic desire is meant to identify invariant patterns
and processes in a manner that a purely contextualist or culturalist
approach cannot. The model seeks, then, to combine an emphasis

on positing dynamic invariants and constraints with an emphasis
on the theory’s openness to contextual determinants.
Yet the reader may be skeptical about a concept that is so essentially protean. On the one hand, mimetic desire is said to involve

an agent’s emulative relation to another person, a relation that is
inherently conflictual: the other’s desire is at once a model and an
obstacle, with rivalry being a likely result. On the other hand, another type of mimetic desire is said to involve an agent’s hierarchical relation to another person, a relation that is essentially one of
subordination: the imitator perceives the model as a master or a
ruler and is said to desire quite spontaneously the other’s satisfaction. Is this not a matter of seeking to explain two rather different
things in terms of the “same” kind of desire? What does the theory
of mimetic desire have to say about the difference? When queried
along these lines, Girard once responded that it was the “culture”
that was the determinant condition of such differences.!5 This
seems to be the right general approach to take. In the terms that I
have proposed above, the difference between imitative and emula-

tive desires would be linked to the two different kinds of tutelary
beliefs that the desiring agent may have about the model. One belief posits a model who is superior, and whose superiority is in one
way or another placed out of reach. To desire following this figure’s desire is not to seek to equal or surpass but to subordinate
one’s wishes and endeavors to those of the model. There are many
examples in many cultural spheres, especially in those where re-

56 - Models of Desire
ligious beliefs serve to ground social differentiation in a transcendent, extrasocial source. Girard elaborates on this theme, for exam-

ple, in his discussion of Shakespeare’s conception of “Degree” (TE
165—66). The other constellation of tutelary beliefs about the
model also involves a notion of the model’s superiority or hierarchical difference, but this advantage is not perceived as being
permanent. It is instead taken as a strategic difference to be overcome if possible. The other’s perceived difference is a spur to actions that have the goal of diminishing this difference, or more
frequently, of maintaining the relation of inequality while reversing the roles. This is the world of envy. A superb illustration is
provided by Girard’s analysis of the conspirators’ mimetic relations
to Caesar in Shakespeare’s play (TE 185-99).
Thus it is possible to flesh out the tutelary beliefs so as to render
the motivational scenarios more credible; in reference to more specific contexts, such descriptions can involve a great deal of nuance
and detail. It is in such terms that Girard specifies his concept of
the “distance” between the mediator and the subject, and with it,

the distinction between “internal” and “external” types of mediation. Girard writes that this distance cannot be defined in terms of
physical space: “the distance between the mediator and the subject
is first of all a spiritual distance.” He goes on to imply that the
distance may be “social” and “intellectual.” Yet this is too vague:
given that such a belief would be expressed very differently from
one sociohistorical context to the next, it is impossible to provide a
specific and detailed description of the “distance” between model
and desiring agent in these terms. The same is true of the related
subdistinction between “endogamic” and “exogamic” forms of
“internal” mediation. Yet the theory does provide definitions of
the agent’s relation to two different types of models, and we can
link these two relations functionally to different kinds of beliefs
about the model. Thus “external mediation” involves a desiring
agent's relation to what may be called a “hierarchical model.” “Internal mediation,” on the other hand, involves an agent’s relation
to an “obstacle model” in an emulative form of desire. In this manner we express the distinction between internal and external mediation precisely in the terms called for by another of Girard’s

57 - Elements ofMimetic Desire

clauses, which is surely the most essential, for he states that in the
case of external mediation, “no rivalry with the mediator is possible” (DDN 9/23). Elsewhere in the same text, Girard similarly

equates a decrease in the “distance” between model and imitator
with an increase in “equality” that exacerbates rivalry: “The increasing equality—the approach of the mediator in our terms—
does not give rise to harmony but to an even keener rivalry” (DDN
136—37/160).

Elements of Mimetic Desire

I am now in a position to recapitulate this analysis in the form of
some basic definitions of terms necessary to the description of a
minimal episode of mimetic desire, the hope being that these definitions could facilitate the analysis of more complex cases in subsequent discussions. Readers who dislike this sort of analytic exercise
are cordially invited to skip this section. The schematic notation
will not be used in the rest of this work.
First we designate three types of situations. The most abstract is
the basic episode of mimetic desiring, defined as follows: There
must be an agent, A, whose state of desire has as its content the
realization of a state of affairs or course of events, S. At some point

prior to this attitude of desire, and perhaps concurrent with it, the
desiring agent A had a belief to the effect that a model, M, desired
a similar situation S. This latter belief 1s the mimetic agent’s attribution of desire. At the time of desiring S (and perhaps for some
time prior to this moment), agent A has another belief that qualifies
the agent M as a model whose desires (or at least some of them) are
in some sense worthy of imitation. This 1s the mimetic agent’s “tutelary belief.” The essential content of the latter is specified as follows: “M is the kind of person I would like to be because M is
eras
, and does
.
Some or all of these Nene are filled in os attributes that in A’s
mind are evidence of M’s hierarchically superior difference in relation to A. Furthermore, A’s tutelary belief about M generates A’s
desire for S, possibly in a nonconscious manner (meaning that A

58 - Models of Desire

need not be aware of the role these conscious beliefs play in the
formation of A’s desires). Here is an informal definition incor-

porating these clauses:
Given agents, A, B,C, . . . , in a spatiotemporal location; given

abstract types of situations, S, S’, S”,. . ., which are the possible
objects of an agent’s intentional attitudes, such as belief and desire;

given a type of belief, M, instances of which are concepts of “models,” M, M’,M”,. . .; given, finally, a type of belief, T, instances of
which are T, T’, T”, ... , where these are tutelary beliefs that

qualify an agent as a model, a basic episode of mimetic desire requires the following:
. Att), A believes that M desires S.

.
w=At tp, A believes T, where T serves to qualify M for A in
regard to S.
3. At tz, A desires S’, similar to S.

4. A’s beliefs under (1) and (2) jointly generate A’s desire
under (3).

This minimal “episode” of mimetic desire is itself an abstract type
of situation that can be concretized in various ways. Two subvarieties of this situation can be specified, namely, “emulative

desiring” and “imitative desiring.” Thus we have the following
terms:
ABSTRACT TYPES OF SITUATIONS, S, S', S”,. . . , serving to clas-

sify other abstract types of situations, or PARTICULAR SITUATIONS 1626°85) 7
=
MIMETIC DESIRE = MD
EMULATIVE MIMETIC DESIRE = ED
IMITATIVE MIMETIC DESIRE = ID

where an abstract situation classified as MD is classifiable as either
ED or ID but not both; and where any particular situation s that is
classified by MD is a case of either ED or ID.

59 - Elements ofMimetic Desire
Given this setup, we can specify some basic elements of any episode of mimetic desire as follows:

A: the agent who experiences the state of mimetic desire
Iw: the state of mimetic desire

S': the abstract type of situation that is the content of A’s desire
S: the abstract type of situation that is the content of M’s desire in
A’s attribution of desire to M
M: A’s model concept, the agent to whom A attributes a desire
for S
B: (when applicable) the real agent to whom A’s model concept
refers
T: A’s tutelary belief that qualifies M as A’s model
“Emulative desire” is defined as a case ofbasic mimetic desire in
which the desiring agent’s relations to the model and to the object
of desire are of the sort discussed above as “internal mediation.”
An example was A’s desire to supplant B as chairperson. Basically,
this variety of mimetic desire requires that A’s desire for S’ and M’s
putative desire for S could not in principle both be realized because S and S’ are mutually exclusive situations. Moreover, although A has a tutelary belief serving to qualify B as model, this
belief does not in A’s view entail the impossibility of the success of
A’s emulative desire: whatever the form of “hierarchical superiority” attributed by A to M in this belief may be, it is not a matter
of A’s belief in an “abyss” separating A and M. More precisely, A
believes that the emulative desire in relation to B has some possibility of being satisfied.

Chapter Three

Patterns of
Mimetic Interaction

Expanding the Framework
The focus of my discussion of mimetic desire so far has been extremely narrow. Although my proposed definition of a minimal
episode of mimetic desire may help to lend a certain amount of
rigor to the discussion of this concept, it hardly corresponds to the
broad range of Girard’s analyses, which embrace personality structures as well as dynamic patterns of interaction. And that sort of
breadth is clearly a necessary feature of any adequate theoretical
model of mimetic phenomena.!
In what ways, then, does the theory of mimetic desire need to
be developed? Girard’s psychological insights typically have to do
with the ways in which people’s lives are shaped by significant and
longstanding relations to a single model. We need to distinguish,
then, between highly punctual and transient imitative relations
and a different and more significant sort of mimetic relation to a
model or a “mediator.” Moreover, an emphasis on the latter will
lead to the analysis of typical interactional patterns that may be
associated with mimetic desire. Girard’s most extensive and detailed discussions of mimetic desire indeed focus upon complex
sequences of interaction involving a number of agents.

Girard’s emphasis on patterns of interaction can be understood
by situating his assumptions in relation to the entrenched opposition in psychology between the proponents of “trait” and “situa60

61 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

tion” theories.” Trait theorists typically assume that the consistency of an individual’s behavior can be analyzed in terms of the
traits or invariant features of that person’s personality or “character,” these features being exemplified both in publicly observable
behavior and in self-descriptions. A major polemic began, however, when the trait theorists’ belief in the relative consistency of
personal traits was challenged.’ The consistency of the person was
said to be an illusion having its source in the observer, whose dogmatism, sampling biases, instrumental attitude, and so on, were

held to be the ultimate bases of the invariant traits wrongly attributed to individuals. Situationalists contend that behavioral consistency is manifested across situations, not persons, for consistent
behavior 1s elicited by situations instead of being generated by invariant internal features of the individual personality. This kind of
criticism of trait theory is not based on some kind of belief in the
irreducibly particular and irregular nature of behavior, that is, a
total rejection of nomothetic psychology in favor of idiography;
rather, situationalists believe along with trait theorists that behavior exhibits lawful variation, yet they expect to find a different sort
of regularity, namely, one linked to a variation of the situation.

Various proponents of an “interactional” approach have rejected the opposition between “trait” and “situation” theories as a
false choice, their claim being that psychological regularities are
the product of the interaction of a broad range of variables, including both situation and personality traits. The basic insight here
was already expressed in Kurt Lewin’s formula, B = f(P, E), which

specifies that behavior is a function of the person and the environment, but this formula is probably best described as a broad
heuristic and not as a theory.* The interactional thesis may be understood, then, as the view that person and situation are interdependent; but in another version, it would be a matter of reference

to a combination of independent person and situation factors. The

former position makes a great deal of sense, for it is unclear in what
terms a taxonomy of objective “situations” is to be constructed so
that they may then be correlated with behavior. Most of the significant “situations” that one can readily imagine as having some kind
of impact on behavior cannot be described in terms of objective

62 - Models of Desire

spatiotemporal boundaries nor even in some set of invariant social
or cultural terms; instead, reference must be made to the agent’s
relation to the “situation” in question, in which case the situation’s
role as a fully independent variable is vitiated.
Girard is clearly an “interactionist” in the sense that he describes
the development and manifestation of personality primarily in
terms of the agent’s ongoing interaction with other agents.> Girard’s stress on “patterns of interaction” and on systematic relations reveals a strong affinity to Bateson (1972), a common source

being cybernetics and systems theory. Girard’s stress on this point
is so great that he has chosen to speak of an “interdividual psychology,” a neologism that underscores the refusal to acknowledge the
existence of personal essences prior to the reality of interaction.
Nor is the Girardian psychology a differential one at a fundamental level: the assumption is that in certain important respects there
is an essential sameness to human individuals (whence his emphasis on the theme of “the doubles”). The terms of this “sameness”

need, I think, to be stated very precisely, and at times there may be
a blurring of normative and descriptive categories in such passages. Girard certainly does not say that all personality structures
are at all times the same: the structures of “the coquette”’s attitudes and typical actions are not identical to the structures of everyone else’s, for otherwise, why speak of “the coquette” at all? Yet
certain attributions of differences to this type of personality are
identified as illusory (e.g., the rejection of any belief in a coquette’s
or anyone else’s successful and superior narcissism), and it is in relation to these attributions that the thesis of an essential identity of
“the doubles” finds its first meaning. The point to be underscored
here is the interactionist emphasis of the mimetic theory, which
moves away from the reified traits approach without having recourse to the theoretical fiction of objective situations directly
serving to motivate behavior.
In developing the theory of mimetic interaction, then, it is necessary to proceed in several directions at once. Discrete episodes of
mimetic desire need to be described in terms of the individual
agent’s momentary attitudes, but these episodes in turn need to be
related to more extensive and more significant segments of a life

63 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

history, segments having a certain “narrative” coherence for the
agent. Moreover, a developmental perspective is crucial insofar as
the individual's particular relations to others are in part motivated
by attitudes developed earlier on as a result of interactions with
other individuals. Such long-term processes of interpersonal mediation obviously begin in childhood. Although Girard frequently
criticizes the Freudian tendency to assume that all models are parents and parent surrogates, it is obvious that caretakers are the
human infant’s first partners in mimesis. Even if we agree with
Girard—as I think we should—that other individuals may, at later
stages in life, play decisive roles, it remains necessary to study

the sociocultural conditions under which the role of parental modeling varies. One may well ask, for example, what kind of personal
and cultural conditions are likely to make parental modeling
an overarching influence on the individual or, on the contrary,

only one episode among others in the ongoing formation of

personality.

From Episodic Modeling to Personal Mediation
As a first step toward developing the mimetic theory, I propose a

broad distinction between discrete episodes of imitation and a situation in which an agent has a more significant mimetic relation to
a single model or “mediator.” Punctual modeling, then, would be
distinguished from personal mediation. Some such distinction is
clearly implicit in Girard’s analyses of cases where the agent is
strongly focalized on a particular model, and this kind of focalization is also what distinguishes an atomistic variety of imitation
from processes instrumental in the formation and transformation
of the larger dispositions one may associate with “personality” and
“patterns of interaction.” Thus I think the distinction is crucial to
the theory and needs to be developed. The terminology is to some
extent arbitrary. Freudians would probably claim that what is at
stake in the distinction is the difference between imitation and
identification, but I think it best not to adopt a term that is so heavily charged with the meanings granted to it in a host of conflicting

64. - Models of Desire

Freudian constructions, the status of which is open to question.
On this point I follow Bandura’s trenchant survey of the literature
on “identification”:
Except for the common assumption that identification involves wholesale
incorporation of personality patterns, there has been little agreement
among its proponents on how the construct should be conceptualized.
.. . Not only is there little consensus of how imitation should be distinguished from identification, but some theorists assume that imitation produces identification, while others contend, with equally strong conviction, that identification produces imitation.®

In what follows, I will reserve the term “mediator” for cases where

the mimetic agent’s relation to another person is more significant
and more enduring than an instance of punctual imitation. “Significant” and “enduring” are, of course, rather vague notions, but

the intuitive basis of the distinction being proposed can be evoked
by pointing out that typically a child’s relation to its caretakers 1s a
very good example of the kind of significant, long-term modeling
that we have in mind; but of course, parent-child relations are not

so very easy to define and do not exhaust the category, and we need
to provide some more explicit criteria if the proposal is not to be as
vague as the notions of “identification” just criticized.
It may be useful to give examples that illustrate the basic intuition behind the distinction that defines the two extremes of a
broad spectrum of types of imitation. If someone chooses to purchase a particular brand of toilet article more than once as a result
of an imitative relation to a particular actor who appears in television advertisements, this actor should hardly be called the agent’s
“mediator,” although the performer clearly does serve as the referent of the agent’s model concept. If, on the contrary, someone is
led to adopt certain basic political attitudes and make crucial professional decisions as a result of the influence of a particular leader,
then we may speak of that leader as having served as a “mediator”
for the agent. In both cases there is an imitation of another person,
but the differences between these cases may be more important
than the similarities.

65 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

Yet what is the nature of these differences? Let us evoke another
example. In acquiring a skill such as driving an automobile, it is
necessary to attend to what others say and do, to model one’s own
performance after the implicit and explicit norms that determine
the difference between competent and incompetent driving. An
effective way to acquire such a skill is to imitate some particular
person who plays the role of instructor. This kind of imitation is a
matter of learning to perform a number of different actions that
together make up the complex competence labeled “knowing how
‘to drive.” Now, if an agent learns to drive from some one person,
does it follow that this person is the agent’s mimetic model or mediator? We can plausibly argue that more than one desire is effectively imitated; in watching the model, the agent learns that it is
desirable to have the hand brake on when parking on a hill; that he
wants to make sure that there is no car in the other lane before
changing lanes, and so on. He may also acquire a preference for
standard or automatic shift and perhaps even an expressive “style”
of driving, such as big brother’s tendency to take risks while overtaking, and honking aggressively when another driver does not see
that the light has turned green. There is clearly a lot of imitation
going on in this very basic and unexciting example of learning. But
is the bundle of mimetic episodes involved in learning how to
drive from someone a case of having a mediator? Is the overall sequence “significant” enough? The example can be pushed in either
direction: in some cases driving is a matter of personal mediation
and in others it is not. Imagine a case where learning to drive is
anything but a robust example of personal mediation. In this case
all of the motivational dispositions imitatively acquired through
interaction with the driving instructor pertain uniquely to the
basic competence required for driving. In other words, no other
objects of desire from any other sphere of activity are involved.
Moreover, no basic attitudes or preferences are added or altered,
especially not any important attitudes pertaining to the agent’s
sense of his or her personal identity or self-concept. Finally and
perhaps most important, the person taking the course in driving
has not been drawn to this particular instructor because of some
significant tutelary belief about that individual; on the contrary,

66 - Models of Desire

the student’s belief that this person is a qualified driving instructor
alone suffices to motivate imitative learning.
Let us now imagine a contrasting example of someone for
whom the learning experience is an instance of personal mediation. Suppose a teenage boy learns to drive from an older friend,
who also serves as his model in other activities, such as how to

dress, how to dance, and how to produce a gentle fade with a six
iron. In learning to drive, the young man forever abandons a number of former pleasures and believes that getting a driver’s permit
involves an explicit and major change of personal identity. For the
teacher and learner alike, driving is a supreme pleasure; cruising
about town is viewed as an important end in itself as well as a
means to other ends. Moreover, the older friend is believed to be a

special and particularly qualified teacher, and more generally, the
kind of person that he would himself hope to become.
It is possible to extract from these illustrative examples some
basic criteria that would typically correspond to the differences between punctual imitation, isolated episodes of mimetic desire, and

personal mediation. Punctual imitation can be motivated by any
number of “thin” beliefs about the model; for example, the imitator may simply take a chance that copying the other person’s behavior could be an effective means to a given end and has no other,

more substantive reason for imitating that particular person. I
have suggested above that in all cases of mimetic desire, the tutelary belief that qualifies someone as a model to be imitated involves,
on the contrary, the belief that this person is, for various reasons,

“the kind of person” that the imitator would like to be. In other
words, in any episode of mimetic desire, the imitator has both a
real and an ideal conception of self and perceives someone else as
corresponding to the ideal in some significant way. In respect to
that ideal, the other’s desire is deemed worthy of imitation.
Such requirements are not met by my typical example of someone who learns to drive from a driving instructor. The imitator
may very well aspire to be the kind of person who drives very competently, and this for any number of reasons, but the imitator does
not long to be the kind of person who gives driving lessons for a
living. Copying someone’s preference for a certain type of cosme-

67 - Patterns of Mimetic Interaction

tics could be another example in cases where it does not entail that
one has any more generalized longing to become the type of person that this individual represents. A purely episodic instance of
mimetic desire, however, would require that the imitative desire be

‘

motivated by a more substantive belief about the model. Fully
fledged “personal mediation” would correspond to cases where
this kind of mimetic modeling comes to have a longstanding significance for the individual’s self-conception. Such is the case in the
example of the teenager’s relation to his older friend. The young
man’s consistent and longstanding imitation of his older friend is
motivated by his belief that this fellow embodies a range of virtues
that are together fully definitive of the kind of identity he would
like to create for himself. And it is this direct and enduring relationship to an idealized self-concept that is at the heart of personal
mediation, which is thereby quite different from the purely instrumental relation to a person from whom one borrows relatively
trivial means to ends that one has already determined for oneself.
One may, it is true, look to a genuine mediator in search for effective means to one’s ends. Moreover, these means need not range

across any great variety of activities. In Girard’s analyses, it 1s often
the case that the mediator is followed in primarily one sphere, that
of romantic desire, yet this one sphere 1s firmly linked in the imitator’s mind to a global conception of self. This latter notion, then, is
the key to the difference between instrumental imitation, episodic

modeling, and mimetic mediation. Given the importance of the
notion in this context, it would be appropriate to specify in more
detail what is meant by a “self-concept.”

The Self-Concept
The notion that needs to be developed here does not require a solution to the various thorny issues surrounding the question of
personal identity. In other words, we need not try to distinguish
between an “agent” and a “person” by requiring the latter to possess a “transcendental apperception” or some other manner of successfully unifying his or her various experiences or recollections.

68 - Models of Desire

Instead of looking for the correct formulation of the unity or identity relation at the heart of a normative concept of personal identity, my aim is to single out a particular type of belief figuring in an
intentional agent’s various mental states (which may or may not
have the kind of unity that would be stipulated by the winning
theory of personal identity, should there ever be one). At the same
time, the idea of the self-concept is complicated and resembles
philosophical discussions of personal identity because it will not
suffice to say that the beliefs in question are simply any secondorder beliefs of an agent A where A happens to figure in the belief.
It makes sense to say that any such belief is at least potentially pertinent to a self-concept that an agent A could have, but it does not
make sense to say that the self-concept of A is reducible to the sum
total of such beliefs. Rather, the belief must involve the agent’s attempt to arrive at a reflective unification, not of the sum total of his
or her experience, but of some privileged subset of the agent’s beliefs,
actions, and preferences.” The self-concept that I have in mind is,

then, an agent’s momentary and perhaps deluded answer to the
question “Who am I?” and not a well-founded and consistent response to the question “What have I experienced?” Thus it differs
from the basic approach to personal identity initiated by Locke
and developed by Anthony Quinton, Paul Grice, and others.’
What must be required of a belief for it to figure as an instantiation of the kind of “self-concept” being invoked above? We do not
need to require that it be accurate nor that it be consistent with
other self-identifying beliefs held at other times by the same agent.
We do, however, need to require that it be in some sense nontrivial

and nontautological. The response to “Who am I?” takes the form
of reference to some set of definite descriptions, not the tautological form of the proper name, or that of the transcendental I = I.
Here I agree with Ernst Tugendhat’s critique of the tradition according to which the particularities of the word “I” are thought to
be the key to self-reflection and to the identification of a person.?
More generally, I think it useful to take up the analysis of the logic
of “knowing who” questions proposed by Steven Boér and William Lycan.!° These authors stress the privileged role of definite

69 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

descriptions in responses to such questions and point out that the
“regress” of “who” questions is only stopped by the limiting criteria implicit in the questioner’s “project” relative to the person
whose identity is in question. There is no exhaustive description of
a person, but limited descriptions may serve as adequate responses
to the question “Who is N?” when the question is motivated by a
particular project in relation to N.
This observation is useful when we turn to the issue of the selfconcept, for we may employ it in attempting to specify the nature
- of the “privileged” subset of beliefs about self that make up a “concept” of self. Thus we can say that a self-concept is a response, not
to any and every possible question of the form “Who am I?” but to
questions of that form that are motivated by a certain type of project in relation to oneself. What type of project? As stated above,
our requirement is that the belief must involve the agent’s attempt
to arrive at a reflective unification, not of the sum total of his or her

experience, but of some privileged subset of the agent’s beliefs, actions, and preferences. But what criteria define this privileged subset? I do not think it will be possible to say anything terribly specific on this issue without sacrificing the general validity of the
answer; to say, for example, that the agent’s self-reflection is motivated by a desire to know his or her own “substance” or “essential
identity” is to make too many assumptions about the belief structures supposedly shared by all human agents. A more neutral
phrasing is to be preferred. Thus we could say that the self-concept
arises in an effort to provide a summary of those beliefs, actions,
and judgments that are most “salient” and “characteristic.” And
most frequently, this search will be further delimited by reference
to some particular issue or domain. Thus we would call a particular belief about oneself an instance of the self-concept when it
arises in response to a “Who am I?” question; moreover, this question is concretized in the following form: “In regard to some particular domain of activity, what are my salient beliefs, actions, and
judgments?” The summary provided in response may furthermore

be motivated by particular normative and epistemic goals, such as
questioning the consistency of the beliefs and actions or holding

70 - Models of Desire
them up for evaluation in regard to some other real or ideal performance (e.g., that of an idealized mediator). Clearly, a lot of different kinds of projects are contained within the more general project
of arriving at a summary description of one’s salient beliefs, actions, and preferences.
To sum up, we will say that an agent A’s belief is an instance of
A’s self-concept if the belief serves, for A, to provide a summary
description of some of A’s salient beliefs, actions, and judgments.

This description is developed in reference to some particular domain of activity deemed by the agent to be of special importance,

and thus it is not necessary for A to see the description in question
as representing a global or exhaustive account of all of A’s experience and doings. Yet it is stipulated that A view the subset as
characterizing a central or significant facet of A’s beliefs, actions,

and judgments. Typically, this means that the self-referential beliefs have to do with A’s understanding of one or more of A’s intrinsic ends or life themes, or perhaps with the issue whether A is
successfully realizing these (1.e., the beliefs could focus on the appropriateness of A’s actions in relation to a particular end).
Emphasizing intrinsic ends is, however, but one way to satisfy
the requirements of the “central or significant” clause. (Note that
the “self-efficacy” conception privileged by some contemporary
social psychologists represents one way in which an agent may engage in a self-interrogation. My point here is more general in that
we do not assume that the most significant and most important
instances of “Who am I?” questions all have the hidden form, “Am
I efficacious?”)"! A schematic example ofa self-concept may help to
clarify what is meant. It occurs to Chang Guangxi while visiting a
neighbor that truly reverent people make generous votive offerings at the familial shrine, and he is incited to ask himself whether

he has consistently done so in the past, as well as whether he is

intending to do so in the future. In response to this self-query,
Chang Guangxi thinks that he has not in fact been as diligent as he
could and should have been, and he also thinks that this fact is im-

portant to his life. This belief, then, is an example of a nontrivial
self-concept.

71 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction
Mimetic Relations and Interactions

We may now develop the analysis of mimetic phenomena involving significant relations and interactions between at least two desiring agents. Although the distinction is implicit in my argument,
I will not try to provide here a precise definition of the difference
between “interactions” and other relations between human agents.
One could in this context evoke the Weberian intuition whereby
social interaction requires that the agents in question have a “sub- Jective orientation” toward each other.!? It may be interesting to
note in passing that by Weber’s own admission, imitation is a phenomenon standing “on the indefinite borderline of social action”
because an agent’s imitation of another agent’s action does not entail that the imitator has the requisite sort of “subjectively meaningful orientation toward” this other.!3 Even less does it entail that
the two agents have a reciprocal meaningful orientation toward
each other, for the model or mediator may or may not be aware of

the imitator’s existence and may or may not act in function of the
other’s anticipated behavior.
Girard’s analyses of mimetic relations embrace a broad spectrum of cases, ranging from an individual’s or group’s mimetic relation to a model who does not reciprocally orient himself or herself to the imitators, to the intensively interactive configuration
that Girard calls double mediation. Instead of seeking to establish
taxonomic distinctions within this spectrum, I shall undertake to

provide careful descriptions and analyses of some of the most important configurations emphasized by Girard. This approach will
at the same time allow me to highlight certain differences between
forms of mimetic desire as we move along the spectrum ranging
from mimetic relations to mimetic interactions.
I shall now provide a first approach to what is one of Girard’s
most unique aid original insights, namely, his discovery of the
general interactional pattern known as double mediation. At the
most general level, double mediation is any situation in which two
agents serve reciprocally as each other’s models or mediators.

Various factors must be taken into account before this basic insight

72, - Models of Desire

can be translated into an adequate description of the phenomena
associated with double mediation.
To begin, Girard’s analyses often focus more specifically on
cases where the mimetic desires in double mediation are of the emulative variety. Cases of reciprocal imitative (nonrivalrous) desiring are conceivable and no doubt very “healthy,” but this is rarely
what Girard has studied under the rubric double mediation. Instead, for Girard, the world of double mediation is a world of internal mediation, that is, a world where agents no longer have any

firm conviction in the unassailable externality and transcendence
of models. Social ideologies of stable and long-lasting hierarchical
differentiation have been vitiated, giving way to a world where
rivalry and competition, far from being restricted by social norms
and systems of belief, are widely encouraged and promoted. In
Girard’s terms, this is the movement from a world of external me-

diation to a world of internal mediation. It should perhaps be reiterated that the distinction in question is not determined by the
physical presence or absence of the mediator within the desiring
agent’s sphere of existence. Such a factor may be important to the
description of actual situations but is always secondary to a more
fundamental fact, one that concerns the kind of beliefs that the im-

itator possesses in regard to the mediator or model. To grasp this
point, we need only recall Girard’s remark to the effect that although Don Quixote is almost always within close physical proximity to Sancho, the latter never dreams of emulating his master,
who forever remains Sancho’s external mediator (DDN 9/23).14

The world of internal mediation is a sociocultural context in
which a profound crisis has disrupted the kinds of imaginary social
differences and barriers that constitute the apparent stability of a
Sancho’s relation to a Don Quixote. This is a world of acquisitive
individualism and “upward mobility,” a world where equality is
held forth as the yardstick of all justice and legitimacy, indeed as
the very regulative ideal and vanishing point of social life, while at
the same time a perpetual quest for personal distinction is the predominant emblem and lifetime burden of the successful and “welladapted” individual. Thus the difference between external and internal forms of mediation corresponds directly to the historical

73 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

emergence of certain ideologies of equality, ideologies that reveal
the arbitrary and illusory bases of the institutions and differentiating concepts that formerly erected barriers between agents. Thus
Girard writes: “The increasing equality—the approach of the mediator in our terms—does not give rise to harmony but to an even
keener rivalry. Although this rivalry is the source of considerable
material benefits, it also leads to even more considerable spiritual

sufferings, for nothing material can appease it. . . . When he emphasises [szc] the vicious circle in which the passion for equality is
.trapped, Tocqueville reveals an essential aspect of triangular desire” (DDN 136—37/160).
Although this factor sometimes is not sufficiently emphasized
by Girard’s interpreters, his analyses of double mediation must always be understood as being inscribed within this particular sociohistorical framework, that is, one defined in terms of a radical

overturning of the ideology of hierarchy, on the one hand, and the
emergence of a contradictory ideology of equality and competitive
individualism, of leveling and distinction, on the other.!> For this

reason, the theory of mimetic desire is not an individualistic psychology or a social psychology of small group dynamics. Even less
is it a philosophy of “self and other.” On the contrary, the theory
of mimetic desire 1s intimately connected to a conceptualization of
the predominant cultural and social institutions of the modern
world. A characteristic passage in which Girard stresses the interrelation between sociocultural factors and the analyses of individual psychology reads as follows:
As we have pointed out, only our society can unleash mimetic desire in a
number of different domains without having to dread an irreversible escalation in the system, the runaway defined by cybernetics. It is because of
this unprecedented capacity to promote competition within limits that
always remain socially, if not individually acceptable that we have all the
amazing achievements of the modern world—
its inventive genius, and so
on. The price for all of this is perhaps not invariably the aggravation
beyond all bounds, but certainly the democratization and vulgarization,
of what we call neuroses, which are always linked, in my view, to the reinforcement of mimetic competition and the “metaphysical” aspect of the

related tensions. . . .

74. - Models of Desire
In a world where individuals are no longer defined by the place they occupy by virtue of their birth or some other stable and arbitrary factor, the
spirit of competition can never be appeased for once and for all. Indeed it
gets increasingly inflamed; everything rests on comparisons that are necessarily unstable and insecure, since there are no longer any fixed points of
reference. The manic-depressive has a particularly acute awareness of the
state of radical dependence that people occupy vis-a-vis one another, and
the lack of certainty that results. As he sees that everything around him is
image, imitation, and admiration (tmago and imitare derive from the same
Latin root), he passionately desires the admiration of others. He wishes
for all mimetic desires to be polarized around himself, and he lives
through the inevitable lack of certainty—the mimetic character of what
develops—with a tragic intensity. The smallest sign of acceptance or rejection, of esteem or disdain, plunges him into dark despair or superhuman ecstasy. (TH 307—8/432-—33)

Reciprocal Mediation
I shall now present a schematic description of a minimal episode of
reciprocal mediation. Given two agents, A and B, at time t, neither

A nor B is the other’s mediator or model (but neither has any beliefs about the other that could prevent this from happening). At
t,, agent A somehow rightly or wrongly comes to believe that B
desires a particular object of desire, S. Agent A then mimetically
desires S in turn. Let us temporarily call the interesting variant in
which B, at t,, does not in fact desire $, DM,, as opposed to DM,
which is a case where B at t; does desire S. Now, at t,, A behaves in

a manner such that A’s desire for S is known to B at ty (or, say, t3).
B’s knowledge at t; of A’s desire for S then serves in the formation
of B’s mimetic desire, at ty, for S (with A, of course, as B’s media-

tor). At ts, B in turn behaves in a manner such that B’s desire for S
is known to A. In the case of DM,, this means that A’s false belief
that B desired S is replaced by a true belief about B’s desire for S. In

the case of DM), A has new evidence for believing that B desires S.
(Let us note in passing that it is imprecise in most cases to say that
A’s false belief “becomes true” as a result of this process: if A
wrongly believes at t, that B desires S, and if B does desire S at ty

75 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

and A knows it, it does not follow that A’s first belief was any less
false. It is correct to say, however, that A’s false belief has, through

an interactive process, contributed to the realization of a situation
where B comes to desire S and A knows it. But note as well that A’s
false belief at ty is only “self-fulfilling” given the satisfaction of certain conditions, namely, those under which B is somehow disposed to take A as his or her model; we would generally point to
the requisite tutelary beliefs about A in delineating these conditions.) The process of double mediation need not stop at ts. At t¢,

. A renews his or her efforts to have S, which only adds further confirmation to B’s views concerning his mediator’s inclinations. Thus
we have a cycle that would tend to reinforce the agents’ respective
desires, all other things being equal.
Now, what is interesting about this general type of interactive
sequence? Although at first glance the scenario just introduced
may seem unremarkable, it is in fact the basic schema of a complex
and rich model having a surprising generative capacity. I will make
some broad claims along these lines before settling down to a
more methodical demonstration. Very generally, two features may
be identified. First is the emphasis on the strongly systemic quality
of the relation, for as Girard points out, it is a matter here of the
kind of informational feedback process that cybernetic approaches
find at the heart of complex communicational and interactive systems. I will demonstrate this in more detail in a moment, but it

should be obvious that we have here a case of strong reciprocal
determination (a kind of Wechselwirkung) between the agents.
Moreover, the system is not static, for in certain of its possible
sequences, states emerge that are qualitatively different without
having been intended by any of the parties concerned. This leads
us to a second very general point: we have here an analysis of an
intersubjective dynamic that refers consistently to the agents’ cognitive states, including not only their interpretations of their own
situations and actions and those of the other parties but also the
agents’ ongoing conceptions of the interactive system as a whole.
The intersubjective reality of the interaction, however, is not reducible to either of these subjective viewpoints nor to the sum
total of the two.

76 + Models of Desire

The analysis, then, is both systemic and cognitive. In regard to
the latter, what is of particular interest is the emphasis on the generation and role of certain forms of misrepresentations within the
system of interaction. Girard’s analysis of double mediation is,
properly speaking, “mythogenetic” insofar as it describes a systematic emergence and reinforcement of states of misunderstanding (if
not delusion) in the agents. Not only does the process generate the
latter, but it engenders certain forms of self-defeating behavior as
well. Girard thus proposes a model of a kind of subjective irrationality without having recourse to the arbitrary positings of
death drives or any similar constructs. Finally, the claim is made
that the theoretical model of double mediation has a special explanatory value in relation to certain specific varieties of rivalrous
and aggressive interaction. This is not equivalent to the more general claim that imitation and modeling can be the vehicles for the
spread of aggressive forms of behavior—a claim that would in no
way be unique to Girard. Bandura, for example, writes that “modeling influences play an especially important role in the rapid contagion of aggression.”!6 Rather, the claim is that a particularly pernicious type of cycle of aggression is successfully modeled in the
theory of double mediation.
In what follows I shall unpack and evaluate these broad claims.
I begin with the cognitive elements of the system before moving
on to the larger issues of its genesis of self-defeating and aggressive
interactional patterns. I take up the particular claim about a strong
link between mimetic interaction and aggression, and more specif-

ically, cycles of revenge, in chapter 5.

Mimests and Misrepresentation

To what extent does the theory of mimetic desire in general, and
the theory of double mediation more particularly, depend on assumptions about the necessity ofthe mimetic agent’s misrepresentation or unawareness of certain key factors of his or her situation?
An answer to this question 1s suggested by the fact that a key term
in Girard’s discussions of mimetic desire is méconnaissance, which

77 + Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

may be translated variously as “misreading,” “failure to recognize
or to appreciate fully,” “misrepresentation,” and so on. Girard
speaks of desire’s “false conclusions,” of its “forgetting,” its “primordial error,” and of its “inability to recognize” certain realities
(TH 329/461). He asserts that there is a logic proper to the méconnussance engendered by mimetic phenomena. In the context of a
discussion of Freudian theories, he proclaims that the failure to
recognize the true nature of mimesis is “le véritable inconscient [the
real unconscious]” (VS 189/260, Girard’s emphasis).}7 In a striking
- passage, Girard expands upon the strange combination of knowledge and error, lucidity and forgetting, at work in certain advanced stages of double mediation: “Desire is always using for its
own ends the knowledge it has acquired of itself; it places the truth
in the service of its own untruth, so to speak. . . . The idea of the
demon who bears light is more far-reaching than any notion in
psychoanalysis. Desire bears light, but puts that light in the service
of its own darkness” (TH 304/429).
Is it possible to distinguish between the different kinds of
méconnassance that are at once a condition and a consequence of
mimetic interaction? It may be useful to recall here that in the most
general category of mimetic desire proposed in chapter 2, it is not
stipulated that the self cannot be aware of its own desires or of the
role of mimesis in the formation of those desires (which is not the
same as claiming that the self can attain some kind of total selfknowledge). Nor does it seem a good idea to make the total lack of
any significant moments of awareness of the mimetic bases of desire part of a normative (or descriptive) concept of normality. In
some cultural contexts, it may be highly normal to be aware that
one’s self-concept is largely determined in relation to some other
person, such as an elder, teacher, parent, religious leader, or dzrec-

teur de conscience. Is there any sense in which cases of external mediation necessarily or commonly involve a form of méconnaissance?
An answer to this question will put us in a better position to isolate
the specificity of the misunderstandings and distortions at stake in
internal (and double) mediation. Now, although this is quite out
of keeping with Girard’s tendencies, I think that we want to say
that no delusion or distortion is necessarily part of every case of

78 - Models of Desire

external mediation. Let us recall that following our analysis, only
two beliefs necessarily figure in a minimal episode of mimetic desire, namely, the belief about a model’s desire for a particular object
and a tutelary belief, which qualifies this agent for the desiring
agent. Given that either of these two beliefs can refer falsely to a
real state of affairs, either can be the source of a misrepresentation
on the part of the desiring agent. Moreover, one could also identify a second type of cognitive constraint within mimetic desire by
pointing to the agent’s inability (or consistent failure) to have an
accurate awareness of certain other aspects of his or her situation
—not a méconnaussance but a manque de connaussance, or lack of belief in regard to a particular issue or reality.
A first question, then, concerns the necessity of falsehood 1n the

imitative agent’s two beliefs about a model or mediator. I think we
want to assume that an agent can have a true and justified belief
about another agent’s state of desire for an object, and so we allow
that the first belief can be a relatively undistorted form of knowledge.!8 What about the tutelary belief? Many of the cases referred
to by Girard certainly involve an agent’s credence in the superhuman qualities of the model, who is wrongly granted a difference or
prestige, a form of being or knowledge, having no basis in reality;
as Proust’s narrator puts it, the other is thought to “withhold the
secret of truth and beauty.”!9 Could there be a tutelary belief that is
not erroneous? The question hinges upon many far-reaching assumptions about the status of value judgments and the evaluation
of the rationality of preferences, but I think it is possible to establish, at least as a limiting case, that all beliefs qualifying another
agent as a model need be neither false nor unjustified. The purely
strategic calculations motivating the preferences of Orléan’s rationally mimetic agent could serve as an example, for such an agent
makes a cognitive best bet in a situation of uncertainty.
It could be argued, however, that as soon as genuine tutelary
beliefs are in question, the agent’s beliefs necessarily lack any sort
of robust epistemic warrant. Such an argument could be based on
a normative relativism to the effect that no such thing as an intrinsically valuable state of affairs really exists. Following such arguments, the “ought” cannot be grounded in the “is,” and value is

79 : Patterns of Mimetic Interaction

reducible to the preferences of organisms for one state as opposed

to another. It would follow that it is impossible to have any knowledge about which state of affairs is really intrinsically best; there

could be knowledge about one’s own and others’ preferences as to
the “kind of person” one wants to be, but to think that some model
has the secret to the question of value is an essential misrepresentation of the situation. It would follow as well that the uncertainty
about the value of things, an uncertainty that is said to be an important basis for mimetic desire, would arise quite spontaneously
~ as soon as agents recognized the truth that judgments of value have
no real basis in matters of fact.
I will neither develop nor seek to refute the latter line of argumentation here. Even if we were to accept this normative relativism, it is not clear in any case that it necessarily follows that we

want to attribute a fundamental méconnaissance to all desiring
agents who believe that a mediator embodies a certain type of social or personal virtue. In some cases, the cultural context and
framework of beliefs is such that to speak of the relativity of value
is to import a philosophical problem that can only result in a distortion of the description of the conditions of desire. This said, it
may be useful to make one further observation about the typical
form of the tutelary beliefs supporting external mediation. Frequently these beliefs have to do with an agent’s acceptance of a
permanent hierarchical difference between self and other. Such beliefs can effectively function to legitimate and sustain institutionalized forms of domination and privilege, and thus any sociopolitical ideology dedicated to a norm or ideal of social justice
based on some understanding of equality will tend to reject the
conceptual bases of external mediation. Yet the shift to internal
mediation does not necessarily mean that the beliefs in hierarchy
are totally eradicated. As we will see below, at least one form of
internal mediation involves a tendency to generate and strengthen
the agents’ misrepresentations of each other. What should be contrasted, then, is not a world of stable hierarchy and a world of

equality but worlds where personal identity is part of a relatively
stable system of social differentiations, on the one hand, and
worlds where identity is caught up in a complex and difficult pro-

80 + Models of Desire

cess of social comparison, unguided by unanimous and stable
standards.?°
Moving on to the second type of cognitive constraint on mimetic desire, we now ask whether there are any important facts or
states of affairs of which the desiring agent cannot become aware
in the case of external mediation. My view is that the theory should
include the possibility of an agent who has a second-order belief
that his or her own state of desire 1s linked to his or her own belief
about the model’s desires. The mimetic agent can know that she
believes in the model’s prestige and can know that this beliefisthe
reason why she desires the same thing the model desires. Is such an
awareness also possible in the case of internal mediation? We have
defined the latter in terms of the agent’s emulative relation to a
model, which means the agent wants to replace or supplant the
model in relation to some particular object of desire. There is no
logical reason why such a desire could not exist alongside a belief
in the model’s absolute supremacy or superiority, or even a belief
that the origin of the desire is the agent’s own model attribution.
In other words, the agent of internal mediation need not believe
that his or her own desire is anterior to the model’s desire; nor need

this agent be unaware of the structure of the desiring relation.
Thus at a purely formal level, the cognitive constraints are the same
as in the case of external mediation. But there is something misleading about this conclusion, particularly if we reflect on what
was said about the ideologies of individualism, equality, and competitiveness characteristic of the world of internal mediation. The
strictly formal possibilities of our most general model of internal
mediation do not capture the typical configurations that are emphasized in the majority of Girard’s analyses, which focus on the
special case of double mediation. Let us proceed, then, to a discus-

sion of the cognitive constraints characteristic of the latter.

Cognitive Constraints and Double Mediation

I shall begin with a case of reciprocal or double mediation. By definition, we have here a situation where both agents desire a similar

81 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

object and where it is impossible for both of these desires to be
successfully realized. Now, what do the two agents know about the
situation? Each is aware of the other’s desire, and each has a tute-

lary belief qualifying the other as a model. In what follows, we
will assume that the tutelary belief is initially a rather minimal one,
and not a far-reaching and profound belief in the absolute and permanent superiority of the model. At this point we have a situation
in which each agent has at least the following cognitive states: (a)
recognition that the other desires an S; (4) recognition that self
~ desires a similar S’; (c) recognition that S and S’ are mutually exclusive situations; and (d@) at least a minimal tutelary belief that
qualifies the other as model. What other misrepresentations, states
of awareness, and lacks of awareness, then, can be added to such a

situation to produce a variety of different outcomes? A survey of
Girard’s discussions of double mediation suggests that the following list of possible cognitive states should be taken into account. A
“+” mark indicates an occurrent or focal belief held by the agents;
a “—” mark indicates a constraint that determines the absence of
the belief or recognition mentioned (which is different from having an occurrent belief in the logical negation of the belief marked
“+”). In the following list, the term “belief” is used to refer to

false beliefs, while “recognition” is reserved for true beliefs.
+ Tutelary belief about other
+ Belief that other desires S
+ Recognition that self desires S’
+ Recognition of mimetic basis of own desire for S’
— Recognition of mimetic basis of own desire for S’
+ Belief in own spontaneity
— Belief in own spontaneity
+ Recognition of other’s imitation of self in desire for S
Recognition of other’s imitation of self in desire for S
NON—
SOS
et
ear
+ Belief in other’s spontaneity in desire for S
11. — Belief in other’s spontaneity in desire for S
—S
7 + Recognition that other’s resistance is result of mimesis
13. — Recognition that other’s resistance is result of mimesis
+ Belief that other’s resistance is sign of object’s value
— ve

82. - Models of Desire

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

— Belief that other’s resistance is sign of object’s value
+ Belief that other’s resistance is sign of model’s prestige
— Belief that other’s resistance is sign of model’s prestige
+ Belief in model’s hierarchical superiority to self
— Belief in model’s hierarchical superiority to self

20. + Belief that model believes in selfs (not model’s) hierarchical superiority
21. — Belief that model believes in selfs (not model’s) hierarchical superiority
22. + Belief that model believes in selfs inferiority
23. — Belief that model believes in selfs inferiority

This list pertains to a particular moment in the interactional sequence of reciprocal mediation, a moment when neither agent has
defeated the other in the attempt to satisfy the emulative desire. In
the sequence sketched above, this was the moment t; or ts, the moment when both agents are aware of the other’s desire, and the
moment when both have the occasion to interpret the other’s resistance to the satisfaction of selfs desire for S’. Obviously, the sequence does not normally end here, and the possible scenarios will
be discussed in a moment. But much remains to be said about the
possible configurations at t;. For the moment, we will simplify the
analysis by making the arbitrary assumption that the agents’ beliefs are perfectly symmetrical: if an item in the list applies to A,
then it applies to B. Clearly, in a second stage of analysis this assumption will not hold. In either case, a first question concerns the
compatibility of the different kinds of beliefs in the list. A second
question has to do with the impact that these different beliefs, and
different combinations of them, will likely have on the agent’s subsequent desiring states and action. Girard is interested in the ways
certain of these beliefs are privileged, as well as in how they in turn
tend to lead to certain pathways of interaction, including the reinforcing of self-deception, rivalry, and self-defeating behavior.
First, let us look at the question of compatibility. It would be
tedious to make an exhaustive list, but a few observations are in

order. Quite trivially, the following pairs are incompatible: (4)
and (6); (4) and (5); (8) and (10); (6) and (7); and so on. Ob-

83 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

viously, (1), (2), and (3) obtain in all cases, so the question is

which other items will figure in particular scenarios. In cases in
which both agents are lucid about the mimetic nature of their desires, (4) and (7) will hold; should they also be aware that the

other is imitating them, (8) and (11) obtain as well. The configuration that Girard considers to be far more important, indeed fundamental, can be called the “disciple’s situation.” The disciple knows
that he or she is imitating the model, and thus (4) and (7) obtain.
Also, the disciple attributes an essential superiority to the model,
~ which rules out any belief that the model could be imitating the
disciple (9). This can often be linked to the disciple’s view that the
model’s desire is spontaneous or nonmimetic (10). Here we encounter what Girard calls the fundamental error of the disciple,

and of mimetic distortions in general. The cognitive items just
mentioned conjoin to support the model’s inferences, the most important of which is a particular misinterpretation of the model’s
opposition to the full realization of the disciple’s desire. Thus the
disciple’s situation involves (13), (14), and (16), which means that
instead of seeing that the rivalry follows from the reciprocal imitation that defines the situation, the rival makes erroneous inferences

about the model’s motivations and relation to the disciple, as well
as inferences about the implications for the object’s value.
Now, what has just been said is crucial to Girard’s reading of the
patterns of double mediation and probably identifies what he sees
as the most basic and common form of méconnaissance, one that

will in turn generate quite far-reaching effects. In a nutshell, it is a
matter of the disciple’s or imitator’s inability to see that the person
taken as model can in turn imitate the disciple. As a result, the disciple consistently misunderstands the model’s behavior as well as
the rivalry that is inscribed within the situation. Girard discusses
this typical pattern in the following passage:
The model-disciple relationship precludes by its very nature that sense of
equality that would permit the disciple to see himself as a possible rival to
the model. The disciple’s position is like that of a worshiper before his
god; he imitates the other’s desires but is incapable of recognizing any
connection between them and his own desires. In short, the disciple fails

84. - Models of Desire
to grasp that he can indeed enter into competition with his model and
even become a menace to him. If this is true for adults, how much truer it

must be for the child experiencing his first encounter with mimetic desire!
(VS 174—75/242)

But why insist in this manner on the point of view of the disciple?
Girard’s response is as follows: “As for the model, no matter how

self-sufficient he may appear, he invariably assumes the role of disciple, either in this context or another. From all indications, only
the role of disciple is truly essential—it is this role that must be
invoked to define the basic human condition” (VS 147/206—7). In
what follows, I follow Girard’s lead in focusing on the perspective
of the disciple, or in other words, the perspective of an agent

whose desires are formed in connection with beliefs about other
agents thought to be hierarchically superior in one way or another.
I am less sanguine, however, about the possibility of identifying
in these or any other terms something called “the basic human
condition.”
At this point, I have only described the initial stages of a typical
pattern of double mediation. What happens next? Here we must
return to Girard’s emphasis on the process of feedback, which en-

genders new effects. Of particular importance is the way in which
the disciple’s initial beliefs are altered by a misunderstanding of the
model’s motives: “Desire refuses to understand why the model
changes into an obstacle, but it sees clearly that this change always
takes place. A phenomenon as reliable as this really must be taken
into account” (TH 327/458). In this regard, Girard writes:
The value of the object grows in proportion to the resistance met with in
acquiring it. And the value of the model grows as the object’s value grows.
Even if the model has no particular prestige at the outset, even if all that
“prestige” implies— praestigia, spells, and phantasmagoria—is quite unknown to the subject, the very rivalry will be quite enough to bring prestige into being. (TH 295/417)

In terms of our list of the cognitive items that may figure in a sequence of reciprocal mimetic interaction, the disciple’s “primordial error” may be described in terms of the retroactive transfor-

85 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction
mation of the initial configuration of beliefs. More precisely, (1)
and (2) are affected; not only does the disciple now have further
evidence for thinking that the model desires the object in question

but the disciple can infer from the model’s resistance that this
desire is strong. At the same time, the basic tutelary belief that
qualified the model as model is strengthened. Why? In thinking
about this question, we must remember that in the situation being
described, the disciple cannot say to himself that in manifesting an
insistent desire for the object, the model is being propelled by the
- disciple’s own prior manifestation of desire. Thus the model’s
demonstration of desire is read by the disciple first of all as revealing aspects of the model’s character. The particular attributions
will, of course, vary from situation to situation, but such traits as
“force,” “spontaneity,” “strength of the will,” “persistence,” “selfassertion,” and so on, provide a reliable indication of the kind of

attributions that could be expected in a world where the ideology
of acquisitive individualism is the overall framework of evaluation.
To shift to another register, we could say that the disciple tends to
think that the model is being “active,” not “reactive,” in striving
for the object. For example, in Proust, what fascinates the erudite
and worldly Swann is Odette’s “fleeting, elusive, and cunning

will.”21
The resistance to the disciple’s desire is not understood by the
disciple as resistance to the disciple, but as yet another manifestation
of the model’s spontaneous and immediate relation to the object.
At the same time, the disciple can draw certain conclusions about

the implications of the master’s attitude toward the disciple, and
more generally, about the hierarchical relation between them.

(These conclusions are identified, quite schematically, by [18],
[21], and [22] in our list.) According to Girard, this means that the

disciple will tend to interpret what has happened in terms unfavorable to his or her own self-image:
Even if he holds himself to be persecuted, the subject will necessarily ask
himself if the model has not got some perfectly good reasons for denying
him the object. An increasingly weighty part of himself will carry on imitating the model and, by virtue of this fact, will take the model's side,

86 - Models of Desire
secretly justifying the hostile treatment he believes he is undergoing at the
hands of the model and interpreting it as a special condemnation that he
probably deserves. (TH 296/418)

A similar passage includes some additional nuances:
The disciple feels compelled to make some sort of choice between himself
and the model; and it is perfectly clear that he will choose in favor of the
model. . . . The disciple feels guilty—though of what, he cannot be sure
—and unworthy of the object of his desire, which now appears more alluring than ever. (VS 175/243)

In short, the contention is that in at least one typical scenario of
reciprocal mediation, the result is a reinforcement of at least one of
the agent’s desires for the object (14), as well as a transformation or

strengthening of the agent’s beliefs about the model of this desire
(1), but also (18), (21), and (22). Moreover, the process is iterative, so that the consequences of one stage become the starting
point of yet another cycle: “the elements of the system react upon
one another; the prestige of the model, the resistance he puts up,
the value of the object, and the strength of the desire it arouses all
reinforce each other, setting up a process of positive feedback”
(TH 295/417). The result is the agent’s fixation on the model in
question. It 1s easy to see that under these conditions, a situation of
reciprocal modeling could engender either one of two much more
significant types of mimetic interaction: a case where an agent A,
caught up in the process just described, comes to take an agent B as
a mediator; or again, a case where both A and B take each other as
personal mediators. The theory, then, suggests a certain way in
which an agent’s fixation on another agent can transform the latter
into a mediator by means of a process that reinforces and develops
the imitator’s beliefs in the other agent’s qualities and superiority.
Girard insists upon this point in the following passage:
In so far as the mimetic process comes to a conclusion, the model of desire
is transformed increasingly into an ontological model. The more the value
of the object increases, the more this object comes to appear as being

87 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction
linked to a superiority in being
—a superiority that, in the final analysis, is
that of the model itself. To sum up: once again desire tends to relinquish
the object and become fixated on the model itself. (TH 333/465—66)

If we understand this passage’s emphasis on the desiring agent’s
concern for a superiority of being as merely one way to characterize the kinds of beliefs that may support a relationship of hierarchical difference, it describes perfectly well the way in which modeling and a more significant and binding relationship of personal
- mediation may develop. The particular object of desire and the relation to this particular model are no longer viewed by the desiring
agent as mere means to other, more important ends and come to
be seen instead as intrinsically desirable; the model may be deemed
unique, and there is no question of looking elsewhere; finally, the
outcome is thought to be of crucial importance to the desiring
agent’s own self-definition.

The Self-Defeating Agent

Until now, our retracing of Girard’s analyses of a typical pathway
of reciprocal mimesis has focused primarily on the complex cognitive conditions involved in the first moments of the interaction.

But Girard’s theory does not stop at this point but moves on to
discuss the possible scenarios that follow upon particular outcomes of the rivalry that was occasioned by the two agents’ mimetic convergence on a single object of desire that cannot be
shared. The agents’ interpretations of these outcomes have important consequences for what follows. And it is in these terms that
Girard is able to define some typical syndromes that amount to the
characteristic cognitive, affective, and interactional patterns of
certain formations of mimetic desire.
Focusing still on the perspective of the disciple—the fundamental perspective, in Girard’s view—let us assume that the kind
of process described above has taken place. So that we have an
agent who desires a particular object and is engaged in rivalry with
a mediator who has a particular prestige in the disciple’s eyes. The

88 - Models of Desire
disciple’s beliefs and awareness, then, are as described above, that

is, as including at least the following cognitive features in addition
to the basic elements of personal mediation: (4), (7), (9), (10),

(13), (14), (16), (18), (21), (22). We may now consider the consequences of some of the possible outcomes of the rivalry, such as
the disciple’s failure to realize his or her desire and the contrary
case where the master for one reason or another steps aside, making possible the disciple’s victory. Girard insists that for the agent
of internal mediation, the typical impacts of these two possible situations are by no means equally important: whereas defeat can
serve to fuel the cycle that was already set in motion, victory is
most likely to be a source of disappointment. If the model’s resistance contributed strongly to the disciple’s belief in a hierarchical
difference, the model’s failure to resist, or failure to resist success-

fully, might be followed by a radical collapse of the model’s prestige, which in turn would give rise to a search for a new model. In
one of Girard’s earliest and most evocative images of this turn of
events, the man who fails to find a treasure under any of the stones
he has overturned ends up looking for a stone that he is too weak
to lift and invests all of his hope and energy in a futile attempt to
overturn it (DDN 176/203).

Some readers may be skeptical at this point, for Girard’s parable
may seem to echo the kind of pessimistic maxims that one associates with Schopenhauer (the only pleasure is the absence of pain,
etc.) Or various romantic dicta about the essential futility of desire.
But such conclusions are premature. It would be a mistake to universalize the irrational and self-defeating patterns that Girard describes, but it would also be an error to rule them out in advance.

Rather, we should attempt to confront the difficult questions
raised by Girard’s hypothesis. How could such a process come
to pass? What strange psychological processes, conscious and
nonconscious, must be at work for the agent to fall into such a
profoundly self-defeating and self-deluded pattern of behavior?
Is it really coherent to suppose that people are capable of spontaneously converging on a course of action that is essentially a matter
of selecting only those models that are the most formidable obstacles to the satisfaction of their desires? Must there be a contra-

89 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

dictory or paradoxical form of self-deception at work here? Can
Girard’s model really make such a disposition plausible without
making assumptions that are at least as mysterious as the death
drives and “compulsions to repeat” that play a similar role within
various Freudian doctrines? After all, Girard himself has stated

that the real unconscious has to do with the mimetic agent’s tendency to make models into obstacles and obstacles into models.
Girard supports his claim by describing a fundamental ambivalence in the implicit orientation of the emulative agent’s de~ sires. As we have already specified, the emulative agent imitates the
desires of a rival thought to enjoy a hierarchical superiority. It is
this belief in the hierarchical difference that essentially sustains
and promotes the self’s desire for the object desired by the other.
Should self win out over the rival, and should this victory be interpreted as a sign of a previous overestimation of the model, then it
may seem to follow that the object never really had the value that
was wrongly ascribed to it. Such a deflation of the object’s value
may also find independent justification in the perceived discrepancy between the anticipated satisfaction to be had in its possession and the real effects of the victory. Following this scenario,
then, should the agent win out over the rival, the object is won but

loses its value. The desire for it is extinguished, and a state of affairs
the satisfaction of which was formerly of great importance to the
agent becomes a matter of indifference.
Let us turn now to the other horn of the desiring dilemma.
What if the agent cannot win the object? This course of events has
the major disadvantage for the desiring agent of indefinitely
postponing the moment of the desire’s satisfaction, but it has the

strange advantage of sustaining, and indeed of progressively fortifying, the belief in the value of the object, which becomes more

and more precious. Moreover, as long as there is hope, the desiring
agent need never recognize that the intensification of desire is purchased at the price of settling into a position in which desire can
never be successfully realized— if by success we mean a satisfaction

of the desire that is not joined to the painful experience of the disappointment that accompanies the object’s sudden deflation. But
why would this disappointment necessarily accompany the satis-

90 - Models of Desire

faction of the desire? This point is not based on any assumptions
about the inherent features of the objects of desire in question (it 1s
not a matter of a pessimism that presents its depreciation of life’s
joys as a form of realism). Rather, the disappointment is “Proustian” in that it is analyzed as the experience of a discrepancy between two states of affairs, the one anticipated, the other actual.

Thus Girard writes:
For victory to change anything in the fate of the subject, it must come
about before the gap has started to widen between all that possession can
offer in the way of pleasure, satisfaction, enjoyment, and so on, and the

increasingly metaphysical aspirations that are brought into being by the
misconceptions of rivalry.
Ifthe gap is too wide, possession will be such a disabusing experience that
the subject will put all the blame for it upon the object, not to mention the
model. He will never blame desire as such, or the mimetic character of

desire. Object and model are both rejected with disdain. But the subject
sets off in search of a new model and a new object that will not let him
down so easily. From this point, desire seeks only to find a resistance that it
is incapable of overcoming. . . . The pursuit of failure becomes ever more
expert and knowledgeable, without being able to recognize itself as the
pursuit of failure. (TH 297/420)

In Girard’s analysis, then, the self-defeating orientation of a particular formation of mimetic desire is to be understood as the unintended consequence of what is in fact an intention to succeed.
But this intent to succeed has as its object only a particular variety
of success, a goal that is in fact unattainable because it is conditioned by contradictory imperatives. If the desire’s objects were
not prized as a result of false beliefs about a rivalrous mediator,

then its disappointment would not be necessary; but once this

inflation has occurred, the only possible result is disappointment
or the deferral of defeat through conflict. Similar conclusions are
drawn by Proust’s narrator:
In regard to love, our happy rival, which is the same as saying our enemy,
is our benefactor. To a being that only excited in us an insignificant physical desire, he immediately adds an immense and wholly alien value, but

91 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction
one that we confuse with this being. If we had no rivals, pleasure would
never be transformed into love. If we had none, or if we did not believe

that we had any, for it is not necessary for them to exist in reality. Sufficient to our well-being is that illusory life that our suspicion and jealousy
grant to non-existent rivals.??

To recapitulate, a highly schematic analysis of the interaction
between the disciple and mediator (agent A and agent B) singles
out the following basic elements:
I.

A’s beliefs about self, B, the object of desire, and the rela-

tion between self and model (including model’s opinion
II.
III.

IV.

of A)
A’s desire for the object
B’s resistance (or efforts to realize desire for the same
object)
Avs beliefs about B’s resistance

In these terms, what happens in the type of internal mediation analyzed by Girard is that (I), (III), and (IV) work together to reinforce (II) and to strengthen (I). Also, in those cases where the
mimetic process is fully reciprocal, the same type of process will
be occurring in B, whose desire for the object and efforts to obtain
it will be strengthened by the knowledge of A’s strengthened desire (unless, of course, A manages to succeed in the strategy of
“askesis,” the hiding of one’s desires). The consequence is that
(III) and (IV) are reiterated or strengthened in turn, which refuels
the whole cycle.
According to Girard, this pernicious, cyclical pattern of double
mediation is a basic, dynamic structure underlying any number of
“pathologies” and “syndromes” identified by a range of psychological doctrines. It is in these terms that he discusses “coquetry,”
which he describes as a “particular form of double mediation”
(DDN 105/125). The theory also offers a reinterpretation of the
phenomena typically associated with “sadism” and “masochism”
as well as what clinicians label as “sexual perversions.” I shall not
seek to reconstruct these analyses here, as more basic issues remain
to be taken up. It seems to me that two questions are of particular

92. - Models of Desire
importance. The first has to do with the specific nature of the delusory or self-deceptive processes at work in the scenario of double
mediation. The second concerns Girard’s various claims to the effect that it is possible to explain the genesis of human beings’ violent behavior, or at least some important subset of it, in terms of
his theory.

Double Mediation and Self-Deception
As I have shown above, certain forms of misrepresentation are es-

sential to Girard’s description of the phenomena of double mediation. In terms of my analysis of typical cognitive elements at work
in double mediation, it may be observed that the following items

from the list are pertinent in this regard, for they represent either
erroneous beliefs (marked “+”) or failures to recognize some state
Of affairs (marked);

1.
5.
6.
9.
10.
13.
14.
16.
18.
21.

+ Tutelary belief about other
— Recognition of mimetic basis of own desire for S’
+ Belief in own spontaneity
— Recognition of other’s imitation of self in desire for S
+ Belief in other’s spontaneity in desire for S
— Recognition that other’s resistance is result of mimesis
+ Belief that other’s resistance is sign of object’s value
+ Belief that other’s resistance is sign of model’s prestige
+ Belief in model’s hierarchical superiority to self
— Belief that model believes in selfs (not model’s) hierarchical superiority
22. + Belief that model believes in selfs inferiority

Given this list, it is possible to ask whether any of these items
must be explained in terms of self-deception or related concepts.
More generally, we are interested in explaining how it is that the
agent can systematically fail to know what is the case in regard to
his or her most personal affairs; after all, it is a matter of the agent’s

93 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction
own motivational states. Items 5 and 6, for example, would seem

to require some explaining: how is it that people can fail to be
aware of their own copying of others, and how can they really believe in their own spontaneity in cases where they are in fact desiring “according to the other”? How is it that the agents can be
aware of their own states of desire but not of the fact that these
desires are linked to the agents’ own beliefs about the model’s desires? Must we invoke paradoxical or mysterious unconscious processes in describing such matters? Must we say, for example, that
mimetic agents lie to themselves in something like the way one
person knowingly deceives another? Girard may seem to move in
this direction when he writes that desire puts what it knows about
itself in the service of “its own untruth” (TH 304/429).
The latter question leads us directly to what has frequently been
discussed as the paradox of self-deception, concerning which there
is a sizable and complex philosophical literature. One author states
the central issue by specifying that self-deception is what happens
when “a person lies to himself, that is to say, persuades himself to

believe what he knows is not so. In short, self-deception entails
that B believes both p and not-p at the same time.”?3 When this
particular analysis of self-deception is adopted, the question that
is usually posed is how it may be brought into line with another
crucial assumption, namely, the basic idea that an agent cannot believe p and not-p in the same sense at the same time. Thus begins
the search for the special senses in which the agent believes p and
not-p, senses that have to do with the specific processes and

modalities whereby such an apparent contradiction could be generated and maintained.”4 For example, the attempt is made to explain the possibility of self-deception in terms of the agent’s awareness and beliefs being partitioned into relatively autonomous
subsystems (either across time or at a single moment). Different
components hold the contradictory beliefs, so that the contradiction (p and not-p) is not actually believed at the same time and in
the same sense by a single subject. Prominent advocates of this approach to self-deception are David Pears and Donald Davidson.
Powerful criticisms of the partitioning strategy, and of the inter-

94 - Models of Desire

personal paradigm upon which it rests, have been presented by
Alfred Mele. In the summary discussion of self-deception and
mimetic desire that follows, I shall adopt Mele’s approach.
Mele argues that the same forms of irrational belief (and behavior) that the partitionists seek to deal with can be explained more
plausibly and economically by an analysis that does not fragment
the agent into a “multiple self.” In particular, he asks whether it is
necessary to have recourse to highly problematic constructs in
which the agent is divided into subsystems that are conceived of as
internal, rational centers of agency and intention. Whereas Mele
recognizes the work of internal processes or subsystems in his explanation of the possibility of the phenomena associated with selfdeception, he critiques any approach that endows the internal subsystem with the intentional capacities that are required in order to
act on reasons and employ a conscious strategy in deceiving another (or the “main”) center of consciousness. In short, Mele seeks
alternatives to those approaches in which the subsystem is said to
act strategically in order to trick a center of consciousness with
which it shares some beliefs but not others.
Mele proposes that it is not necessary to adopt such strong assumptions; in fact, most self-deception is nonintentional. Mele ex-

plains this point as follows: “To be sure, self-deceivers often do
engage in intentional behavior with the result that they become
deceived with respect to p; but I shall argue that they rarely act
with the mtention of decetving themselves.”> In other words, the
state of deception is an unintended consequence of the agent’s intended acts. We can say that these unintended consequences can
have a systematic character without supposing that they must be
the intended results of some hidden subagent’s strategic actions.
To support this claim, Mele discusses typical sources of consistent
error, such as the confirmation bias, in regard to which there is no

good reason for assuming that the agent or subagent intentionally
seeks to err.
The key to Mele’s approach, then, is his focus on ways in which
data can be consistently manipulated in a motivated yet nonconscious way. Thus he formulates the following characteristic and
sufficient conditions for self-deception:

95 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction
1. The belief that p which S acquires is false.
2. S’s desiring that p leads $ to manipulate (i.e., to treat inappropriately) a
datum or data relevant, or at least seemingly relevant, to the truth value
of p.
Oo. This manipulation is a cause of S’s acquiring the belief that p.
4. If, in the causal chain between desire and manipulation or in that between manipulation and belief-acquisition, there are any accidental intermediaries (links), or intermediaries intentionally introduced by another agent, these intermediaries do not make S (significantly) less
responsible for acquiring the belief that p than he would otherwise

have been.?¢

Such an analysis is quite adequate to the forms of self-deception
described in Girard’s discussions of double mediation. Although
some of Girard’s wordings may suggest that desire lies to itself,
there is no consistent emphasis on the desiring agent’s having any
conscious intent to deceive himself or herself, and even less em-

phasis on the splitting of the self into a deceiver and a deceived
party. Rather, an alternative and more economical explanation is
available.
The alternative is in a sense analogous to what was said above
about Girard’s analysis of the self-defeating tendencies of a certain
formation of mimetic desire. What does it mean to say that people
sometimes have self-defeating desires? With a little work, one
could elaborate a paradox of self-defeating desire on the model of
the paradox of self-deception: in the case of a self-defeating desire,
if the desire is successfully satisfied, then it is not really a case of
self-defeat, but then the desire is not really satisfied; but if the de-

sire is not successfully satisfied, then there was no real self-defeat,
and so on. Is it necessary, then, to posit a subsystem that desires the

thwarting of the desires of the “main system”? Cases of self-defeating behavior could be described as situations where the desires of
the main system go unsatisfied, while an inner subagent enjoys a
roaring success in thwarting the main system’s wishes. But in fact
the explanation of phenomena associated with self-defeat does not
require such extreme measures, for they need not be described as
cases where the agents have some sort of paradoxical self-referring

desires. Rather, Girard insists that it is the desire for a particular,

96 - Models of Desire

illusory type of success, and not a desire for failure as such, that
leads to the self-defeating consequences. There is no contradiction, then, but merely a sharp contrast between the intended results of a particular kind of desire and the actual consequences of
acting on this desire. Cases in which the agent has no chance of
actually realizing his or her desire and in which the agent is for one
reason or another unaware of this, would correspond to Girard’s
analysis. It is the agent, then, and not just the desire, that is self-

defeating.
Similarly, one could point out that it is not necessary to attribute a desire to deceive themselves to all agents who consistently fall into a certain kind of error. The error may be the result
of a particular manner of misinterpreting data. Moreover, some
kinds of misinterpretations may be motivated by the nature of the
agent’s desires. Mele’s recommendations are useful at this point,
for he points to four general ways in which the self-deceiving
agent’s misinterpretations may work: (1) selective focusing or attending: the agents’ desire that p leads them to fail to attend to
evidence against p and to focus instead on evidence to the contrary; (2) selective gathering of evidence: the agents’ desire that p
gives rise to a dedicated and systematic search for evidence supporting p, whereas the agents will overlook readily available evidence in favor of not-p; (3) negative misinterpretation: the agents’
desire that p leads them to interpret evidence that counts against p
as failing to count against p; (4) positive misinterpretation: as in
the previous case, the agents’ desire that p vitiates the usual evaluation of evidence (here, evidence which in fact counts against p is
read as counting in its favor).?7
Turning now to the cognitive items that may be associated with
the méconnassance at the heart of double mediation, let us see how

these epistemic shortcomings can be justified without our having
recourse to constructs involving intentional subagency. The cognitive items that we have listed fall into four categories: false beliefs about self; missing recognition of aspects of self; false beliefs
about others (the model); missing recognition in regard to others
(the model). The claim is that certain states of mimetic desire are

systematically linked to these cognitive items. Must this imply that

97 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

the agent, or some subsystem in the agent, desires not to know the
truth, or to believe in the particular falsehoods in question?
In the case of the agent’s cognitions concerning the model, the
response is negative. The agent’s views of the other may very well
be systematically distorted, but they may nonetheless form a coherent whole, flowing logically not only from the agent’s own erroneous initial assumptions but also from the new data as interpreted in the light of these assumptions. There is no paradox of
self-deception because there is no real cognition of any competing
beliefs and thus no mystery as to how the error could be sustained.
It may be pointed out in this regard that in cultural formations
where the ideology of individualism and personal autonomy is a
central or even dominant framework of belief, the very process of
socialization will tend to inculcate in the agent a viewpoint running contrary to any awareness of the mimetic facets of desire—
especially of desire attributed to others, who may be wrongly
assumed to desire spontaneously and not mimetically. If the disciple’s primordial error is to fail to become aware of the model’s imitation of the disciple, this mistake follows quite coherently from
acceptance of the initial, socially given distinction between the
roles of disciple and master.
We may focus, then, on the items having to do with an agent’s
self-understanding, as these would seem to represent the most
puzzling cases. How could an individualist ideology of spontaneous desire resist the immediate data of the agent’s personal experience? Surely it is wilful self-deception when the agent fails
to notice his or her own glaring lack of spontaneity, somehow
obscuring the active role of the agent’s own beliefs about the
model in the orientation of the agent’s desire. For we have stipulated that the mimetic agent must at some point believe that the
model desires the particular object in question; the agent experiences, at the same moment or perhaps at a later time, a desire for
the same object but does not know that the desire and the belief are
linked (5) or falsely believes that the desire is spontaneous (6).
Now, what, more specifically, would be the grounds for claiming
that (5) or (6) necessarily involves some form of self-deception?
Following Mele’s indications, it must be possible to show that

98 - Models of Desire
the agent necessarily has available good evidence for contrary
states of mind; that is, in the case of (5), which describes an absence of a recognition that p, the agent has good evidence of p but
somehow does not make the inference, while in the case of (6), the

agent falsely believes not-p, whereas there is again good evidence
for p. What might this evidence be? Well, the agent knows that he
or she has certain beliefs about the model, and a bit of introspec-

tion could lead to the conclusion that the model’s prestige could be
at the heart of the agent’s own desire for the same thing. But note
already that this is not “evidence” of some direct and inescapable
variety, like the sharp pain that is evidence that a heavy object has
just fallen on one’s foot.?8 If anything here remotely resembles that
sort of direct, personal evidence, it is the immediacy and perhaps
the urgency of the experienced desire for the object. It should also
be recalled that in many such instances it is a belief in the object’s
intrinsic value that is the focus of the agent’s beliefs: the desire is
experienced as a “pull” exercised on the agent by the object, not as
a projection realized by the lanterns of desire. This fact draws attention away from the whole process whereby the desire was
formed, for the desire 1s experienced as having its source “outside”
the agent, that is, in the object. Similar considerations come into

play in regard to the agent’s thinking about the model’s role, insofar as such thinking in fact occurs. The model’s role may be
obscured because the agent considers it perfectly natural or fitting
that the model should also desire what is believed to be an intrinsically valuable or worthwhile object. In the agent’s mind, the convergence of the two desires on a single object requires no additional explaining and gives rise to no mimetic hypotheses because
the powerful pull of the object itself suffices to explain the
situation.
The more general point here is that the agent’s attention may
focus on any number of aspects of the situation, some of which
may readily be interpreted as evidence of the agent’s or the model’s
spontaneity. These are the elements that would provide the mate-

rial for Mele’s four types of misinterpretations. Given the range of
possible misinterpretations, it becomes clear that nothing requires
the agent to conclude, on the basis of the desire and the belief in

99 - Patterns of Mimetic Interaction

the model’s desire, that the former is linked to the latter: such a link

is not, in any case, a matter of a direct perception but a particular
inference. In short, there is no reason to start with the assumption

that the agent knows a p and must consciously and intentionally
persuade him- or herself to the contrary. Rather, the agent of mimetic desire wrongly believes a not-p in spite of evidence to the
contrary; the agent of mimetic desire would have to know p in
order to be lucid about the workings of his or her own desires, but
the agent of mimetic desire does not believe both p and not-p and
does not have to engage in any form of deliberate or intentional
self-deception in order to be profoundly deluded about self, other,
and their relations.

Triangles ofDesire

I believe that it is worthwhile to conclude this chapter with a few
remarks on the idea of a “triangle of desire” that is often associated
with Girard’s thought. In this regard, my central point is that the
hypothesis of a general “triangularity” of desiring relations should

be dissociated from discussions, in common parlance, of the “romantic triangle,” for the two are really not equivalent. In fact, a
careful analysis of romantic triangles as they appear, for example,
in large numbers of literary works reveals a great deal of complexity.
The “triangular” structure of mimetic desire corresponds quite
simply to the distinction between the model (or mediator) of desire and its object, both being necessary according to the theory.
Girard sometimes speaks, and with good reason, of cases where

the “object” of desire “drops out,” so that what is essential is the
desiring agent’s relation to the model. Following the terminology
that I am proposing, this important insight would be expressed
somewhat differently, for every desire must have an “object” or
content (an S) of some sort, and this S is analytically distinct from
the model, even should the contents essentially involve the model
in some way. In other words, to say that what A desires finally is in
some sense the model is not to say that there is no more specific

100 - Models of Desire

content of A’s desire or that this object of desire is quite simply
“the model.” All such cases need to be described more precisely,
for they in fact involve such desires as A’s wish to be romantically
involved with the model, or A’s desire to defeat a mediator in some

rivalry, and so on. Even if we accept the case of A having a “metaphysical” desire for the appropriation of the substance or being of
some person, this is not reducible to the simple replacement of
the content of desire by the beliefs about the mediator. Thus all
mimetic desires have an “object” in the sense that I have given this
term.
But does this mean that all mimetic desires are “triangular”?
What of a situation where A desires an S, this desire being con-

nected to beliefs about the desires and qualities of two distinct
agents, B and C? In some instances, B and C would conjoin to
form one collective mediator concept, M (e.g., the “happy couple”), but I do not see any reason why the alternate case should be
ruled out in principle. Thus I am led to the heretical conclusion
that all particular instances of mimetic desire need not be triangular.
A more important issue is the analysis of romantic triangles in
mimetic terms. In this regard, I think it necessary to argue for the
view that romantic triangles are frequently more complex than
some analyses would seem to imply. A few summary remarks
along these lines may serve to show that the analysis of such
matters 1s not reducible to the application of a simplistic and schematic “French triangle.”
In its most sexist configuration, the romantic triangle is a matter
of two men engaged in a rivalry for the romantic possession of a
single female, who is spoken of as the “object” of the romantic triangle. But this particular pattern is by no means the only one. A
broad distinction can help to make possible a first approach to this
matter: on the one hand are those rivalries where the conflict between the two parties does not in any important way center on the
beliefs and desires of the “object” in question; on the other hand
are the more prevalent cases where the victory in the conflict is to
an important degree, if not entirely, a matter of the desire of the socalled “object” of rivalry, whose preferences determine the winner.

101 - Patterns ofMimetic Interaction

The former class of rivalries hinges on the interaction between the
two rivalrous parties, and thus its instances are best described as

dyadic interactions, although both rivals’ desires may be triangular
in the sense outlined above.
These two classes of rivalry may now be related to the mimetic
model. In regard to the first, we will focus on only those cases
where the two conflicting parties, say, A and B, serve as each
other’s mediators in their mimetic desires for possession of the
favors of C. The “object” of desire, S, in such affairs can usually be

described in terms of a desire to occupy an exclusive relation of
some sort (€.g., Marriage) to C. Thus A’s relation to B, and B’s

relation to A, is essential to the description of the object of both
agents’ desires. The second type of rivalry is more complex and
embraces different variants. What for shorthand can be called C’s
choice is essential, for even if A’s and B’s deepest concern is win-

ning out over the rival, winning C’s choice is an indispensable part
of the object of desire; thus, the “lines of force” do not run solely
between A and B, even if we focus on cases where A and B are

locked in reciprocal mediation. A distinction between intrinsic
and extrinsic desires may help to tease out some of these different
variations. To construct a case where C has the most minimal role
in the triangle, we may specify not only that C’s choice in no way
determines the outcome but that both rivals desire possession extrinsically as a means to the defeat of the rival, this defeat being the
real object of desire. Quite different would be the case where C’s
choice is determinant and, moreover, desired intrinsically by both
rivals. This is probably by far the most important form of “triangularity” in European literary history, and the theory of mimetic desire should not be taken as insisting dogmatically on the
“priority” of the other forms.
Still other variants of the “triangle” become apparent when we
focus on two other factors: (i) the possibility that C may serve as
mediator for A or B; and (ii) the fact that C may also have A or B as
a mediator for some desires that are relevant to the outcome ofthe
romantic episode. Girard’s analyses of romantic affairs where coquetry is in play would seem to involve (1), for the coquette’s display of self-love is an important piece in the machinery.?? Factors

102 - Models of Desire
(i) and (ii) together raise the issue whether the model should include cases of triple mediation, reciprocal or other.
I shall not linger over these mimetic combinations here, for I
think it more crucial at this stage to clarify and to assess some of
Girard’s other claims. In the next chapter, I turn to Girard’s fundamental anthropology. In that context I shall discuss an important
objection that may be raised in relation to my reconstruction of
the theory of mimetic desire: does not Girard want to link his theory of desire to a larger anthropological hypothesis, one in which
“desire” is no longer the primary and most fundamental type of
mimesis? Does not Girard’s anthropology, with its emphasis on
the generation of cultural phenomena from mimetic mechanisms,
run contrary to an approach in which the explanatory value of mimetic desire depends on a prior identification of cultural and contextual factors?

Chapter Four

Mimesis and the

Origin of Culture

René Girard has stated explicitly that the concept of mimetic desire
does not figure in his theory of hominization, which hinges on a
precultural variety of mimesis called la mimésis @appropriation (appropriative or acquisitive mimesis). The operations of mimetic desire presuppose the existence of human symbolic capacities and a
cultural context, but the primitive forms of mimesis that Girard
discusses do not. Mimetic desire may become central to humanity
later on, he states, but it is not already there at the origin: Girard
expressly comments that at the “elementary level the word desire is
not appropriate” (I 32). He suggests that desire transfigures its objects and that “this process of transfiguration does not correspond
to anything real, and yet it transforms the object into something
that appears superabundantly real. Thus it could be described as
metaphysical in character. We might well decide to use the word
‘desire’ only in circumstances where the misunderstood mechanism of mimetic rivalry has imbued what was previously just an
appetite or need with this metaphysical dimension” (TH 296/
321). And again: “For there to be desire according to our definition, the effects of mimesis must interfere, not directly with ani-

mal instincts and appetites, but in a terrain that has already been
fundamentally modified by the process of hominization: in other
words, the mimetic effects and a wholesale re-processing of symbols must develop in unison” (TH 283—84/308).!
What is at stake, for Girard, in distinguishing between mimetic
103

104 + Models of Desire

desire and a more primitive form of mimesis? The response to that
question hinges on the role that the latter concept of mimesis plays
in Girard’s “fundamental anthropology,” that is, in his hypothesis
about the origin of human culture. Although my main focus in
this study is on mimetic desire and not on Girard’s anthropology,
in the present chapter I shall discuss the distinction between acquisitive mimesis and mimetic desire in order to clarify the nature of
Girard’s different assumptions about agency. To that end I shall
present aspects of Girard’s hypothesis about the origin of human
culture, but it is not my goal to provide a systematic assessment of
it.2 As I stated at the outset of this study, I am not in agreement

with those who believe that one must adopt an all-or-nothing approach to the arguments presented in an author’s writings. In my
view, Girard’s genetic hypothesis is logically distinct from his psychology of mimetic desire, which means that it is coherent to accept the one without the other. Girard’s genetic anthropology conceptually depends on a mimetic model of agency, but as I shall
show in some detail in what follows, that model is not the theory
of mimetic desire. And if, as I argued in the last chapter, Girard’s

psychology of mimetic desire rests on certain broad sociohistorical
assumptions, they are not the ones that are essential to the genetic
hypothesis.

The Many and the One

Girard is widely known for his perceptive descriptions of a social
dynamic having two essential moments: on the one hand, the “crisis of violence,” and on the other, the “scapegoat mechanism,”

which provides a resolution to this violent crisis by uniting the
group in opposition to a single victim. The theory of scapegoating

is at once a description of the basic patterns of interaction characteristic of these two moments and a specification of their sociocultural and psychological conditions and consequences. In regard to
this theory, it is crucial to distinguish carefully between different
“scapegoat mechanisms” in Girard’s analyses, or at the very least,
between different ways in which a similar configuration is man-

105 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

ifested. On the one hand, there is the pattern of scapegoating that
figures within Girard’s hypothesis of the origin of human cultures.
This is said to be a mechanism that is activated when crises of violence disturb the order of hominid groups; it produces a collective
murder that results in what Girard calls the first “noninstinctual”
state of awareness. This mechanism and the symbolic effects it produces are the ultimate basis of a properly human social order. On
the other hand, there are the crises and resolutions of violence oc-

curring within historical contexts that are already human and
cultural (i.e., already constituted by the beliefs and institutions of
the sacred). Within the latter category, it is possible to distinguish
between spontaneous instances of the pattern and those that correspond to an institutionalized frame of interaction, such as that of

ritual. The actions and interactions that take place in these two
different frameworks, that is, the ritual and the spontaneous, may

on occasion be structurally isomorphic, and the very boundary
that separates them may in practice be highly unstable, but the distinction between them remains important. My emphasis on such
distinctions is not motivated by a pedantic taxonomic impulse;
rather, these distinctions are at the heart of the explanatory claims

that may be made for Girard’s insights and should be given careful
consideration by anyone who wants to take those claims seriously.
Unfortunately, some of Girard’s readers conflate his various no-

tions of mimesis.
I have quickly distinguished between three different types of
contexts within which certain patterns of interaction—such as the
configuration of the “many and the one” essential to scapegoating—may appear. What is the essential difference between these
different manifestations of an invariant pattern of interaction? The
answer to this question involves the role played by beliefs and symbolic representations in all cultural manifestations of the mechanism. For example, in any instance of scapegoating in a cultural
context, the group’s choice of a victim will be motivated by any
number of beliefs concerning the victim’s “difference,” “guilt,”

and so on. Girard refers to some of these beliefs as the “stereotypes
of persecution” and presents an illuminating categorization of
them.3 He lists the typical signs of “difference” that motivate the

106 + Models of Desire

victim’s selection, a selection that is in fact as “arbitrary” as it is

unjust for the simple reason that the individual chosen could not
possibly have been the cause of the social crisis as a whole. Such,
however, is the mimetically supported delusion of the scapegoat
community, which finds unanimity in opposition to the hapless
victim. It is easy to see how mimetic desire can contribute to this
unanimity: once the accusation has been made and aggressive intent has been expressed, members of the group are strongly motivated to copy the motives of those perceived to be on the side of
order. And this strengthening of social cooperation and consensus
lends a spurious support to the accusatory beliefs that motivated
the selection of the victim. Social order is strengthened or restored
by virtue of the scapegoating process, and this effect is wrongly
interpreted as confirmation of the initial accusation. Scapegoating
“works,” then, but only at the cost of a fundamental misrepresenta-

tion of the victim and of the social process of scapegoating.
The analysis is different in the case of precultural manifestations
of the scapegoat pattern. Girard does not want his genetic hypothesis to be circular, and as a result, in his model of the generation of

cultural beliefs and representations, these beliefs and representations cannot themselves play any role in the functioning of the
very mechanism that is supposed to bring them into existence.
Thus in the description of the mechanism that brings about the
crisis of violence and its resolution by means of an original collective murder, there can be no reference to the hominid group’s beliefs about the victim. This means that the choice cannot be motivated by the stereotypes of persecution or by a belief in the “guilt”
of the victim. Instead, more primitive, nonintentional forms of
mimesis, namely, Girard’s acquisitive and conflictual varieties,
must be responsible for the functioning of the generative mechanism. These same motivational systems may also be operative in
the cultural varieties of the dynamic of crisis and resolution, but
here they may be supplemented and guided by the products of the
mechanism’s own history. Once we are in a historical context, sacred beliefs, notions about the cosmic order, knowledge of kinship
ties, and so on, will play an important role in orienting the agents’
actions. Violence itself, which in the genetic mechanism is but the

107 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

product of the most mechanical form of agency, becomes invested
with a cultural signification that in turn shapes the individual’s
motivational states and understandings of the possible and desirable courses of action: “Desire . . . is attracted to violence triumphant and strives desperately to incarnate this ‘irresistible’ force.
Desire clings to violence and stalks it like a shadow because violence is the signifier of the cherished being, the signifier of divinity” (VS 151/211).
In what follows, I shall focus on the conception of agency figur-ing within Girard’s genetic hypothesis, my primary goal being to
elucidate the notions of acquisitive and conflictual mimesis as a
contrast to the theory of mimetic desire. I should say at the outset
that the goal of my analysis is not to convince the reader that
Girard’s genetic hypothesis is correct. I consider that hypothesis to
be a thought-provoking and important speculation, but I do not
believe that the evidence and arguments today warrant any firm
conviction that any one scenario describes the emergence of human culture out of the primate order around a couple of million
years ago. Not only is this theory highly schematic but the available data simply do not dictate its acceptance.*

Primary Mimesis and Hominid Agency

Girard conjectures that it was the mimetic dispositions of hominid
beings that produced the specifically human phenomena that may
be associated with the emergence of culture, beginning with religiosity or the sacred. Mimesis, he claims, is what produces the
sequence of interactions that lead to “the first noninstinctual attention” —also referred to as “the Transcendental Signifier” (TH 99/
139). Girard writes that “mimetic phenomena provide the common ground between animal and human society as well as the first
concrete means to differentiate the two, concrete in the sense that

all observable analogies and differences between the two types of
organization become intelligible” (J 35). What, then, is this mime-

sis? Girard argues that it cannot be adequately grasped in terms of
classical philosophical notions about teleological action guided by

108 - Models of Desire

the agent’s representation of a goal or plan. The animal that engages in primitive mimicry is not an agent of action in this sense.
Presumably, such an agent does not represent to itself the model’s
actions prior to the generation of its own mimetic response (otherwise, there would be a social representation serving as the condition of the origin of social interactions). Girard asserts that this
primary mimesis is a type of imitation that is “prior to gestures,
attitudes, manners, and everything to which mimesis is usually reduced when it is understood only as representation. This mode of
imitation operates with a quasi-osmotic immediacy necessarily betrayed and lost in all the dualities of the modern problematics of
desire, including the conscious and the unconscious” (DBB 89).

Elsewhere Girard writes that “all subsequent mimetic effects are
ultimately brought back to the radical simplicity of the primordial
mimetic interference. When any gesture of appropriation is imitated it simply means that two hands will reach for the same object
simultaneously: conflict cannot fail to result” (I 32).
Although Girard claims that this kind of mimetic rivalry is not
specifically human, he contends that in the human species, such

forms of conflict are no longer checked by an instinctual inhibition
of intraspecific murder and can lead to a “fight to the finish”: “an
increased mimetic drive corresponding to the enlarged human
brain must escalate mimetic rivalry beyond the point of no return”
(I 32—33). In the same context he goes on to claim that the “mechanism of symbolicity must be triggered by the murderous exasperation of mimetic rivalry.” He elaborates on this theme as
follows:
It was Plato who determined once and for all the cultural meaning of imitation, but this meaning is truncated, torn from the essential dimension
of acquisitive behavior, which is also the dimension of conflict. If the be-

havior of certain higher mammals, particularly the apes, seems to foreshadow human behavior, it does so almost exclusively, perhaps, because
the role of acquisitive mimesis is so important in their behavior, although
it is not as central as it is for human beings. If one ape observes another
reach for an object, it is immediately tempted to imitate the gesture. (TH
8/16)

109 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

As I have already pointed out, Girard describes the process of
hominization as involving, at least in part, an increase in or inten-

sification of the frequency and role of mimesis, including a mechanical form of mimesis whereby behavior is imitated in an automatic manner. How might this primary form of mimesis, which
may be referred to as “motor mimicry,” be more precisely defined?
As a first and purely preliminary approximation, we may suppose
that a few basic clauses are required, as follows:
“Motor Mimicry

Given organisms O),.. . , O,,, together in a single spatiotemporal
location; given as well a type of behavior, B, having particular
manifestations b, b’, b”, . . . , an episode of motor mimicry re-

quires that:
1. at t, O; perceives that O) , ,,b’s;

2. at t, B belongs to O,’s behavioral repertoire (O, has a disposition or capacity to perform tokens of type B); and
Shatter

O, b4s:

This general definition of motor mimicry will not serve, however, as a characterization of Girard’s notion of acquisitive mimesis. He remarks that the objects sought after are essential to acquisitive mimesis and that he cannot insist too much on their
importance in any adequate analysis of the phenomenon: “Our
point of departure is the object; we cannot stress this enough even
though no one understands it, apparently” (TH 16/27). There are
good reasons for this emphasis. For example, it allows the theorist
to get the mimetic process started without having recourse to the
imitative agent’s beliefs or representations (the “spectacle” of another desire, be it real or illusory one): acquisitive mimesis finds its
roots in very basic, biologically explicable dispositions that are already present, such as eating. Girard’s privileged example—that of
two apes reaching for the same banana— implies that acquisitive
mimesis is a matter of behavior that is based in the object to the

extent that the organism’s disposition to grasp and eat this object
arises from a basic and necessary motivational system in the ani-

110 - Models ofDesire

mal. Although it is wrong to adopt any simple depletion-repletion
model of animal motivation—even in the case of needs as basic as
hunger and organisms as lowly as the rat—there is strong evidence
for positing motivational systems that direct organisms toward
specific forms of “appropriative” or “acquisitive” behavior. Such
motivational systems as hunger and thirst effectively guide the animal in relation to types of objects in the environment; these objects serve as primary incentives insofar as the animal is motivated
to make or maintain contact with, to escape from or to avoid, these
objects. It would be misleading, however, to see these incentives

purely in terms of external objects defined by their intrinsic properties; rather, these objects should be understood as external stim-

uli that are contextualized by the nervous system of the organism,
a system that has its own particular history. The ingestion of beneficial substances, for example, is in part guided by the organism’s
previously favorable experiences with a particular type of object.
(For example, there may be some evidence that kittens raised by
rats refuse to kill them, even when hungry.)® Even so, it remains
valid to observe that given this history, and other conditions being
equal, certain motivational sequences are effectively set in motion
by the presence of incentive objects (e.g., foodstuffs), given the
satisfaction of certain conditions relative to internal states (e.g.,
energy depletion). This kind of system gives behavior a teleological orientation because a given incentive object helps to bring
about the motivational state and to define the direction of the behavior motivated by the state in question.”
Girard’s acquisitive mimesis, then, can be said to involve a

matching of behavior in instances where the kind of behavior in
question is generated by a basic motivational system of the sort
just discussed. Hunger stands as the paradigmatic example. Talk of
acquisitive mimesis could refer, then, to cases where the behavior

being matched or imitated is of a type corresponding to the animal’s basic needs or wants (e.g., there is a strong incentive for the
ingestion of this type of object). This manner of filling in the hypothesis has several consequences. First of all, there is no problem
of getting the interactional sequence going because the opening

111 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture
move at t is a nonmimetic gesture of appropriation directly perceived by an observing organism. (There is no need to invoke, as in
the case of mimetic desire, a sequence that begins with one agent’s
belief about a model’s desire.) Grounding the sequence in basic
incentive objects that are identified by basic motivational systems
also plausibly fills in the second clause in our schematic definition
of motor mimicry (the behavior must be part of the imitating organism’s behavioral repertoire). Finally, the hypothesis in question
naturalizes the model. With the exception of cases of apes being
-manipulated by ethologists, there is something unrealistic about a
scenario in which a banana suddenly materializes between two
philosophical apes, who, finding their contemplation disturbed,
must decide what to do about the puzzling intrusion. Having
posed the problem in this manner, one wonders how it is possible
for Desire to begin; must not Desire be schon immer da in order to
get started? But it is not necessary to pose the problem in this manner at all. It is, on the contrary, highly likely that higher primates
and hominids will already be engaged, during significant portions
of their time, in diverse activities involving the pursuit of edible
objects, and this in each other’s presence. Not only is the basic situation described likely to arise but the agents already have an array
of behavioral dispositions.
Yet another stipulation needs to be made if we are to grasp the
specificity of the acquisitive mimesis isolated by Girard. As the
word “acquisitive” suggests, there must be something “selfish”
about the gestures belonging to this class of behavior that needs to
be specified: the banana is grasped in order to be held, kept, possessed, ingested. If the gesture happens to be opposed by another
grasping hand, the object is not simply parceled out or enjoyed in
common. By definition, the class of acquisitive behaviors includes
only those behaviors that have an implicit goal of appropriating
and maintaining exclusive possession or use of some object; one
could perhaps generalize this to include the sole exploitation or
occupation of a place or situation. Insofar as objective possibilities
are concerned, the objects sought after in such behavior might
very well be subject to division or to some form of cooperative use,

112 - Models of Desire

but the organism’s relation to them is such that these possibilities
are excluded from the implicit aims of acquisitive behavior. It is
crucial to understand that the class of behaviors in question here is
not defined or dictated by the intrinsic nature of any class of real
objects in the world. Objects that cannot possibly be shared by two
organisms at the same time do exist; for example, two people cannot both wear the same shoe at once (although one can imagine
them taking turns). But facts of this sort are not in any case what
determine the category of acquisitive behavior. Instead, this category is constituted by the nature of the agent’s relation to a state of
affairs in reality. To spell this out, we may stipulate that the implicit goal realized by any successful example of this kind of behavior is the occupation of a particular position in relation to some
thing or situation, without any other agent occupying this same
position at the same time.
In short, if we refer to the acquisitive type of behavior as ACQ
and to instances of it as acq, acq’, acq’’, . . . , we may propose the

following schematic formulation:
Basic Acquisitive Mimesis

Given organisms O,,. . . ,O,, together in a single spatiotemporal
location; given as well a type of acquisitive behavior engaged in by
them, ACQ, manifested in particular behaviors acq, acq’, acq”’,

. .

,a basic episode of acquisitive mimesis requires that:

1. at t, O, perceives that O),,, acq’s;

2. at t, O, has a disposition to perform tokens of ACQ, this
disposition being supported by a basic motivational system
in O,; and
3. att + 1, (ust after t) O, acq’’s.

Let us now turn to some of the claims that may be made for
Girard’s notion of a primitive acquisitive mimicry, focusing in particular on Girard’s theorizing about human violence and its role in
the origin of human culture.

113 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

Generating Violent Interaction

How does acquisitive mimesis generate the violent crises that are
essential elements in Girard’s genetic scenario and, in a somewhat
different form, in his analysis of a variety of cultural practices? In
the theory of motor mimicry just evoked, it is specified that the
perception of another organism’s behavior triggers preestablished
behavioral dispositions: no beliefs or representational processes
are required; the disposition is already in place; nothing is learned;
no decisions are involved. If this kind of “facilitation” is what is at
stake in Girard’s primitive mimesis, then this might imply that
Girard must posit an inherent, preexisting aggressive “instinct”
that tends to be “released” more and more frequently as the “instinctual checks” are “eroded” by an increased mimesis.’ But in
spite of his occasional use of these “safety-valve” metaphors and
“quantum of wantum” psychodynamic expressions, Girard rejects
this approach and explicitly states that it is mistaken to attribute
the increased tendency toward violence in mankind to the work of
some kind of instinct; on the contrary, the increase in violence is

“part of [7d ne fait qu’un avec| the growth of mimetic activity linked
to the increase in brain size” (TH 95/133).
Now, Girard’s approach to the genesis of violence among human beings differs interestingly from two typical positions on the
subject. The first attributes to the hominids a “desire to dominate”

or some sort of aggressive instinct. Here we refer to the many
pseudobiological versions of the will to power. The second typical
claim amounts to an attempt to generate violence, rivalry, and con-

flict out of an objective scarcity of the goods that are needed by the
organisms, this scarcity being the bread and butter of the discourse
of political economy in its classical and neoclassical forms.? A

lengthy critique of these two stances is unnecessary in the present
context. Suffice it to say in passing that the latter is contradicted by
the multiplicity of cases in which human conflict simply cannot
plausibly be linked to an objectively imposed scarcity, because no
such scarcity exists. The former approach is inadequate because it
is characterized by a dogmatic and imprecise manipulation of in-

114 - Models of Desire

stinct or drive constructs, usually supported by an unexamined
and self-serving exploitation of functionalist evolutionary pseudoexplanations.!° What needs to be explained is how the ape became
a killer; positing a gene and the killer ape’s supposed fitness does
not constitute such an explanation. But is Girard’s alternative explanation any more cogent?
Clearly, a number of questions arise at this point, for the mimetic theory’s manner of generating violence needs to be specified
in much greater detail. Girard is no doubt right in rejecting a
depth-psychodynamic theory of the origin of aggression, that is,
one that “explains” observed violence by positing an instinct or
drive, which is in turn “evidenced” by observed violence. The question remains, however, as to how the basic mimesis that Girard

posits is able to produce an overall increase in violence. What conditions must be in place for this to happen, or rather, what assumptions must be made for the theory to be plausible? It is crucial to
note, first of all, that Girard does not explain humankind’s tendency to engage in conflict simply in terms of an enhanced mimesis, but in terms of a more particular form of mimesis— acquisitive
mimesis. But is this explanation sufficient?
It should be clear that the basic variety of motor mimicry described above is too general to play the role required by Girard’s
hypothesis. As the term suggests, what the theory requires is a tendency to imitate “acquisitive” gestures or behavior. Several hypotheses may be identified: (1) that a generalized tendency toward

motor mimicry, as sketched above, leads to the automatic matching of behavior that happens to be acquisitive, just as it leads to the
matching of other kinds of behavior; (2) that there is an increasing
tendency for a selective matching of only the acquisitive behaviors
displayed by other organisms; (3) that the organism selectively
matches perceived instances of behavior from both the acquisitive
and nonacquisitive categories.
The first hypothesis should be ruled out, for it seems highly implausible that the mimetic organism imitates every behavior of
which it is capable whenever it perceives the enacting of such behavior in the environment. Such a claim is at odds with observed

115 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

cases of social facilitation and primate mimicry. It would seem to
follow that the behavioral system instantiating the mimetic disposition must include a selective device or mechanism of some sort
to serve as a discriminatory gate between the perception of behavior and the setting in motion of effective motivational states. The
idea that motor mimicry is in this manner selective should not be
taken to imply the operation of fairly sophisticated forms of cognition, that is, not only a basic perceptual linkage but some form of
interpretive categorization of what other creatures do. In this
. manner one might imagine that the hypothesis would be pushed
toward a rather different form of mimetic process than the “quasiosmotic” and immediate variety to which Girard refers. It may be
recalled that some fairly sophisticated discriminatory capacities
may be given functional explanations in terms of the nonrepresentational variety of cognition.!! Thus we will specify the necessary
assumption roughly as follows: the disposition to engage in motor
mimicry is a motivational subsystem that operates nonconsciously
in the organism’s selective responses to the perception of behavior
in the environment. The organism’s overall behavioral system includes a switching component that mediates between the perceptual states determined by stimulus inputs and the different motivational subsystems, so that the mimetic subsystem is at times
inhibited, at times activated. Clearly this is not a trivial assumption, and an adequate model must provide further specifications.
What of the remaining two hypotheses? The third hypothesis
clearly seems preferable insofar as (a) motor mimicry of nonacquisitive behavior is a widely observed fact and (4) we do not (yet)
have any theoretical motivation for postulating wholly separate
systems for the mimicry of different types of behavior. Apparently,
the second hypothesis’s only advantage 1s that it promises to generate quite directly the increase in acquisitive behavior that the overall theory requires, but it is not in fact clear that it is the only or the
best way to generate this increase. The third hypothesis, then,
seems best: a general disposition for motor mimicry engenders the
special case of acquisitive mimicry.
What must be dealt with in any case is the more general prob-

116 - Models of Desire

lem of what can and cannot be derived from the class of acquisitive
behaviors that, in one way or another, is promoted by the enhanced mimesis of the hominids. How does acquisitive mimicry
produce violence? It seems obvious that conflict, at least in some
loose sense of the term, is already inscribed within the situation of
acquisitive mimesis. By definition, an instance of acquisitive mimesis has an implicit goal of acquiring or maintaining exclusive
possession or use of some object or situation. When two organisms seek exclusive use of a single object, it is impossible for both
gestures to succeed, and hence there is a potential conflict between
them. It is clear that the disposition for acquisitive mimesis as I
have defined it leads to a situation where two hominids reach for
the same object, but why do they fight? Surely it is not the objective nature of the object that rules out the alternatives (compare
the various speculations that emphasize the importance of food
sharing among primates and the earliest hominids).!2 Why does
the convergence of behavior lead to conflict and not, for example,
to what ethologists call “scrambling,” a situation in which one of
the creatures takes possession of the object and flees with it? Also,
how is it that this same mimesis gives rise to a certain type of resolution of crises of violence within a hominid group? A more detailed account of this model of agency and interaction must be
provided.
A first approach to answering these questions runs as follows.
The progression to rivalry requires that both organisms persist in
their efforts to appropriate the object. Scrambling could be followed by pursuit, which could lead to a confrontation between
two parties strongly motivated to possess the object. At this point
behavior directly related to retaining or seizing the object might be
replaced by gestures aimed at discouraging or incapacitating the
opponent. Here we need to assume that certain forms of violent
behavior appropriate to both attack and defense are already part of
the animal’s behavioral system. That this kind of behavior should
occur in such a situation is wholly plausible. It is not adequate to
say that this kind of sequence is realized when the “instinctual
bonds” are loosened, which implies that some powerful violent

117 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

urge was already lurking in the breast of the beast. A more positive
characterization is required; for example, it could be argued that
the key element in the progression just sketched is the organisms’
persistence in wanting and seeking to acquire the disputed object.
The “strength” or intensity of the motivational state that incites
the organisms to want the object in the first place, along with the
appropriative nature of the want, leads to a situation in which the
organisms are drawn into a conflict.
It may be noted that in the scenario of acquisitive mimesis de_ veloped above, violent conflict does not appear to be the direct or
simple result of only an enhanced tendency to match the behavior
of models. There is nothing inherently aggressive or violent about
the hypothetical propensity for a generalized motor mimicry. It is
only in conjunction with the organisms’ tendency to engage in acquisitive behavior that the mimesis leads to situations of conflict,
and it is only the intensity and persistence of the impulse that leads
in turn to overt rivalry and violence. Thus a key feature of this
model is the hominids’ tendency to adopt acquisitive relations to
various objects in the environment. This tendency is said to operate independently of the propensity for motor mimicry. It is crucial to note that there is nonmimetic acquisitive behavior and that
not all matched behavior is acquisitive. A further stipulation is that
the organism’s acquisitive behavior is guided by basic motivational
systems productive of motivational states that are sufficiently

strong to engage the organisms in a persistent effort to overcome
obstacles in acquiring the incentive objects.
Now, the clauses I have been sketching in may not seem wholly
implausible, but are they sufficient to lead to the kind of effects
required in Girard’s generative hypothesis? A thought experiment
may help us to pose this question more precisely. Let us consider
what would happen in the following situation: While foraging,
two of our hominids happen to find a bunch of bananas. Both have
eaten bananas before and are hungry. In keeping with our little
scenario, one of them “appropriates” a banana. What does the
other one see? Before her stands the first ape, banana in hand; on
the ground lies the bunch of bananas. Now is the moment for our

118 - Models ofDesire

mimetic animal to experience the urge incited by the “quasi-osmotic” mimesis with which the theory equips her. So what does the
ape do? Clearly, she must reach for the banana held by her fellow
creature, which suggests that she must (a) ignore the bunch of
bananas on the ground, although she has seen this fellow take one
of them and could imitate that gesture; and (4) get embroiled in
some unpleasant business with a hungry and dangerous ape, an
ape that is, moreover, intent on keeping his banana. The inherent
preference for acquiring bananas, which is by our postulation
quite strong, is overcome, indeed interfered with. Does this imply
that the creature has an inherent preference for eating bananas that
other apes want to keep for themselves? But that seems absurd. In
relation to this example, it begins to look as if the tendency to imitate the other’s acquisitive gesture must arise from some kind of
motivational subsystem having a high degree of priority within
the overall motivational system of the animal; the key postulation
is that cases in which acquisitive and mimetic motivations converge are most likely to generate the prevailing motivational state.
The lesson of this thought experiment can be generalized: to
keep the particular nature of this aspect of Girard’s generative hypothesis clearly in view, it suffices to imagine the variety of fully
acquisitive behavior the mimetic system of motivation passes over
in favor of an imitative and conflictual variety. In a similar vein,
Girard himself has frequently evoked a kindergarten scene where
children fight to possess one toy singled out from among a wealth
of playthings, including ones identical to the toy being fought over
(TH 9/17). Yet it is important not to let these considerations lead
one to assume that the “object” is inessential in cases of acquisitive
mimesis: Hamlet’s Poles who fight over a plot of land not big
enough to bury them in belong to a different context of analysis.
In short, the specific effects produced by acquisitive mimesis are a
matter of emergent properties not produced independently by
either the system of generalized motor mimicry or the system of
acquisitive behavior. Instead, it is their combination that generates
the unique effects associated in the theory with la mimésis
appropriation.

119 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

Mimesis and the Crisis of Violence

Remaining still within the precultural context of analysis that is
the framework of Girard’s genetic anthropology, we must now
confront two questions: first, what is the nature of the “violent
crisis” generated by primitive mimesis? and second, how does mimesis resolve this crisis? Girard’s critics have always been puzzled
about how the theory explains the transition from a situation
where apes struggle over a banana to one where a whole band of
hominids is engaged in a convulsive struggle, a struggle myste~ riously resolved when the group unanimously murders one of its
own members. To some readers it may all seem like a surrealist’s
rewriting of Totem and Taboo. The skeptic is indeed entitled to a
more detailed account, particularly when it is an unspecified mimetic fluid that seems to allow the argument to slide from step to
step. André Orléan has provided an elegant formal model of how a
generalized tendency to imitate can, under certain conditions, lead
to a situation where the members of the group all choose the same
object. But it is not obvious at first glance that the conditions specified in this model, which deals with the stock market, are satisfied

in any plausible versions of the original anthropological scene involving hominids committing a primordial murder (and Orléan
makes no such claim).}8
In the case of the original murder, an initial situation in which
the various members of the group are engaged in typical activities,
including in some cases appropriative behavior, somehow must
give way to a situation in which aggression has become the predominant or even the sole impulse. In other words, there must be
what Girard calls a “murderous exasperation of mimetic rivalry”
(I 33). This generalized rivalry must then crystallize into the form
of the many and the one, where a group stands united in opposition to a single party. While the kind of acquisitive mimesis already defined seems quite likely to generate episodes of dyadic aggression, what has not been rigorously demonstrated is how
motor mimicry is related to the larger interactional patterns of aggression that figure in the theory. The kind of violent crisis that

120 - Models of Desire

Girard evokes could hardly be a matter of a band of hominids all
trying to possess a single banana and getting in a brawl over it as a
result; rather, what must be postulated is a tendency to match violent or aggressive behavior when it is enacted by a model, and this
independently of any context of acquisitive behavior based on
basic needs. Only then would talk of “spreading” and “contagious”
violence make sense.
Clearly, the Girardian genetic scenario requires both a “crisis of
violence” and its “violent resolution” in the unanimous, collective

murder, with mimesis serving as the connecting link. Yet before
we examine some different ways of conceptualizing the precise operation of this link, it may be useful to examine the nature of the
two situations that it is supposed to connect. The meaning of the
“resolution of the crisis in violent unanimity” 1s pretty clear: all, or
almost all, of the members of the group partake in the collective
murder of a member of the group. But what is the meaning of the
notion of “crisis of violence” that describes the stage just prior to
this resolution? Globally, it may make some sense to speak of a
“crisis” of violence, but locally, it cannot literally be the case that
each and every ape is violently attacking all of the other apes at
once.!4 It may be better to assume that “crisis” refers to a situation
in which all or most of the members of the group are aroused and
are experiencing some violent form of anger or rage, a situation in
which there has been a lot of fighting and the majority of the members have been, and are still, involved in attack, defense, and coun-

terattack, so that the overall situation is one of insecurity. This is
how “generalized violence” may roughly be understood. More
precise sequences of behavior and interaction can be imagined. It
could be a matter of positing a number of dyadic struggles going
on at once. Or perhaps individual hominids charge through the
group, attacking now one, now another, in a series of disconnected assaults that become more and more frequent.
If this model is to be developed, the role of mimesis in the genesis and resolution of the crisis needs to be made more precise.
What, for example, is the place of mimesis in the initial situation

and in the outburst and dissemination of violence? Perhaps we
need only stipulate that among the kinds of behavior that may be

121 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture
imitated, there are various types of aggressive or violent gestures. I
have already argued that it is not necessary to posit an abstract will
to dominate or an aggressive drive in order to make an eruption of
violence plausible. Let us assume, then, that it is not wholly un-

likely that acquisitive mimesis could lead to situations in which
there is some fighting in the hominid group. I think that we also
want to assume that not many attacks would spontaneously occur
at the very same moment in a peaceful group of hominids. It seems
plausible to assume that we are talking about a relatively small
group (one hesitates to speculate on precise figures), but in any
~ case, it would be wild to imagine that all of a sudden a majority of
the members of the group spontaneously would engage in violent
attacks on each other. If one or a small number of violent incidents
is to be disseminated and to lead to a generalized crisis, some
mechanism must bring this about. This role is to be played by mimesis in any Girardian model, but it is important to note that insofar as there is aggressive behavior to be imitated, it is initially isolated; it also seems most realistic to say that this behavior would be
engaged in by a small subsection of the group.

So far, we have the group together, and some fighting is taking
place. For the scenario to work, this fighting has to be generalized
throughout the group by means of mimesis. Now, what does motor mimicry of violent behavior entail in terms of the others’ next
behaviors? In other words, how do we get from here to the crisis?

Several distinct scenarios may be imagined. One would follow Orléan’s model. If our simian scenario is to follow the logic of the
model proposed by Orléan in relation to the stock market, we have

to specify something like the following: at t, each animal is either
fighting with another one or doing something else (e.g., looking
on, foraging for food, etc.); at t + 1, each animal imitates one of
these behaviors; and so on. Now, as I argued above, it seems most
reasonable to assume that in the initial situation, most members of

the group are displaying pacific behavior at any given moment.
Given the probabilistic setup of Orléan’s model, it follows that

most of the time the group as a whole would imitate some form of
peaceful behavior. It is true that given the same setup, there would
also be some cases of a convergence on the initial violent behavior,

122,» Models of Desire

so that crises would also be generated. Now, it may be that this
latter consideration is satisfactory: the model should not generate
the crisis of violence all or even most of the time; what matters is

that the scenario be realized and give rise to its particular effects.
The scenario just proposed is still not very precise, for we have

not yet said what it means for an animal to adopt, at t + 1, the same
“strategy” or behavior that another animal manifested at t. In other
words, what does it mean to imitate an observed instance of aggression? In the absence of a more precise and clearer sense of this
expression, all talk about the link between aggression and mimesis
is in danger of being far too ambiguous. But here we encounter a
basic and unavoidable problem, namely, that it is difficult to provide anything like a precise definition of “aggression” or “violence.”!5 These notions are notoriously diffuse. It may be possible
to define “aggression” as behavior causing physical injury to another organism, yet such a definition hardly corresponds to the
scope of our basic intuitions about the problem of aggression.
Three considerations are typically used to drive this point home.
First, an instance of behavior that is perceived as having been oriented toward causing physical harm but failed to achieve this goal
will still be classified as a serious instance of aggression. Second,
some behavior that actually causes physical injury is not classified
by either party as an instance of aggression. And third, many forms
of nonphysical harm are frequently recognized as instances of aggression. All three of these remarks underscore the necessity of
moving away from a simplistic approach to the problem. This
means that the analysis must shift to a level of description involving references to the agents’ explicit or implicit intents, as well as
to such issues as the agents’ judgments concerning the morality of
the action.
But in the context of Girard’s precultural crisis, such fine distinctions must be held to a minimum. As I suggested above, what
is at stake is an initial situation in which, as a result of acquisitive
mimesis, at least two organisms have effectively engaged in physical conflict or fighting with each other, causing at the very least
violent affective states of fright and rage and perhaps some physical injury. Suppose now that another animal has observed this

123 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture
course of events. What does it mean to say that this observer imitates the violence? To facilitate the discussion, let us assume that A,
is an animal that physically fought with another animal, A,, at t,
and A; is an onlooker at t. What does A; do at t + 1] should it turn
out that A3 behaves imitatively? The following analysis will show
that even this very simple situation contains a number of possibilities that are different in important respects.
First of all, the model of A;’s imitative behavior must be determined. Does A; imitate A), A), or both of them? Two hypotheses,
Hj, and H,, can be defined by stipulating that either A, or A, was

the aggressor in the fight. Given this distinction between the aggressor and the target of the aggression, we can develop a first hypothesis, H), that stipulates that the imitator takes the aggressor as
model and attacks the same animal that the aggressor just attacked.
Another hypothesis, H), inverts the former one: the hominids always imitate the defender and rush in to fight against the aggressor. A third hypothesis, H3, states that neither A; nor A; was

distinguished as the aggressor and allows that A; takes either one
as model with roughly equal probability, the orientation being
“unmotivated.” Following H;3, to say that A; imitates the observed
violence is simply to say that A; attacks either one of the two parties involved, taking the other one as model. Still another hypothesis, H,, runs as follows: the matching of A,’s or A,’s behavior

could simply mean that A, in turn engages in “similar” activity, an
activity that is “the same” as the first behavior only in a general
sense. What is imitated is the “type” of behavior, “fighting,” but
the particular partner in this relation is not necessarily the same:
A; does not necessarily attack A, or A; att + 1, but A; does attack

someone at t + 1. We could generate another hypothesis, H;, by
stipulating that the animal cannot attack either of the two animals
whose violent behavior was just observed: if at t + 1, A; imitates
A, or A,, then A; can attack any animal except A, or A,. (Note that

all of these hypotheses assume unrealistically that the animals’ potential targets of aggressivity are not limited by such categorizations as physical size, sex, age, or memory of prior encounters with
the aggressor.)
Let us now discuss these different hypotheses in terms of their

124 - Models of Desire

potential to generate the crisis of generalized rivalry and its resolution. H, is a scenario that has the advantage of leading very quickly
to unanimity. Here is how. Suppose A, and A, fight. Let A, be the
aggressor. Imitating this first behavior, A3, Ay, .. . , A,, each attack A,; imitating A3, Ay,..., A,, others still in turn attack the

hapless A), and so on. We suddenly get the violent unanimity that
is so important to a theory of social structure based on the pattern
of the many and the one. Yet there are problems with this model.
First, the solution is reached without passing through a stage of
“generalized crisis” or widespread violent disorder; instead, it

looks like a hunting party in which one of the hunters was mistaken for the prey. Second, this is a model of social life where violent aggression is guaranteed to be a successful strategy within the
group and where the target of any act of aggression is made the
object of collective violence. Such a society could quickly take the
form of a game of musical chairs, where the number of players

dwindles with each round! H, is not uninteresting, but it clearly
does not satisfy the Girardian criteria. H, is even less successful in
this regard. Members of the group tend to rush to the aid of victims of an attack and violently pursue the aggressor. The result
could well be a collective murder, but again, no generalized crisis
precedes it, so it is disqualified.
What pattern would H; follow should it happen to lead to the
generalized crisis and its resolution? The imitators can attack either
one of the parties in a fight, and we assume that they do so with
roughly equal probability. Thus, for every dyadic fight at t, there is

a subgroup at t + 1 in which several imitators attack each of the
two parties of the initial dyad. Where does this lead? At t + 2,
some of the other formerly pacific animals join in, and the odds are
that they will attack A, or A,—or one of the initial parties in another dyad at t. So in this model we appear to have a tendency
toward the formation of several coalitions, each having its own
victim. The number of these coalitions roughly depends on the
number of dyadic fights that were going on at t or shortly thereafter. Now, if the tendency to imitate any one of the fighting parties
is roughly equal, it is true that at t + 2 the victims of the coalitions
formed at t + 1 will get some reinforcements; for example, some

125 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture
of the bystanders will join A, in fighting one of his or her opponents. But in the long run the evolution of the violent scenarios
would be toward the formation of several distinct scapegoat parties. What about H,? This hypothesis means roughly that the animal has a disposition to behave following the schema “fight with
somebody” and that mimicry of a model can set an instance of this
general kind of behavior in motion. Hypothesis H; is a more extreme version: the imitator is incited to engage in violence by the
sight of a model but never attacks the same animal that the model
just fought with. In both H, and Hs, whether the model is an aggressor or a defender does not matter, since the direction of the

matching behavior is not determined by that of the model.
Both H, and H; would seem to satisfy the conditions of a

model in which mimesis leads a group to converge on the same
strategy. Would they not lead to cases where more and more animals engaged in fighting? I will focus on H, because H; seems

strange in its exclusion of a literal form of imitative matching.
Now, according to Hy, when A; has seen A, and A, fight, A; goes

into a kind of rage and more or less randomly launches him- or
herself at someone else. And if the “more or less random” selection
of targets is indeed the case, then there can be (a) generalization of
violence, so that all or most of the members get involved in some
fighting; and (4) an eventual convergence on one target. This is
precisely what the hypothesis requires, and thus H, is the most
promising hypothesis for filling in Girard’s scenario. But what are
its assumptions?
The essential difference between H; and Hy, involves what is

meant by matching the behavior of an animal that 1s fighting. One
form of matching is more literal than the other, for it involves
fighting with the same organism that the model fought with. The
other type of matching is more abstractive and schematic: what
the imitator takes from the model is the general category of behavior—fighting. Which of these two interpretations of the relationship between motor mimicry and aggressive behavior should
be given prominence in the model? Girard tends to write as if he
assumed the more “generalized” form of mimesis, that implied in
H,, were operative. But it should be noted that such an assump-

126 + Models of Desire
tion places a certain strain on the conception of a motor mimicry
with its “quasi-osmotic immediacy.” How does it work? In a case
of motor mimicry, the organism does not perceive an abstract
event; what it observes is a particular model’s particular assault on
a particular creature. That this observation could result in a
motivation to attack an unspecified someone is anything but farfetched, but it does imply a certain transformational process
within the imitative agent, whose cognitive/motivational system
in some sense abstracts from the case at hand, singles out another
target, and engages, right away, in a new bit of violence. The
motivational sequence’s relation to particular incentives and observations is drastically loosened here, and we seem to be positing
something like a general disposition toward a type of behavior
vaguely defined as “behaving violently impulsively” or “attacking
at the sight of aggression.” The point, once more, is not that this is
psychologically implausible or incoherent; what could seem incoherent is requiring that this be the effect of our most basic variety of motor mimicry. On the other hand, that the mimetic
motivational state should engage a basic behavioral schema, perhaps in conjunction with strong affective states (violent arousal,
anger, etc.), that propels the animal headlong into a fight is not
really an exotic hypothesis.
It should be recalled that the conflict and aggression generated
by appropriative or acquisitive mimesis is object-related and involves animals fighting over something they wish to appropriate.
A more rapid and more certain spread of violence throughout the
group would be generated by a different mimetic tendency. For
example, when violence is perceived, it becomes a privileged object
of imitation. The innocent bystanders will be likely to imitate the
violence and join in the fray, even though this mimesis is not supported by any basic appropriative form of behavior. Perhaps this is
what Girard has in mind in the following passage:
If the object is excluded there can no longer be any acquisitive mimesis as
we have defined it. There is no longer any support for mimesis but the
antagonists themselves. What will occur at the heart of the crisis will
therefore be the mimetic substitution of antagonists.

127 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture
If acquisitive mimesis divides by leading two or more individuals to converge on one and the same object with a view to appropriating it, conflictual mimesis [la mimeésis de Pantagoniste] will inevitably unify by leading
two or more individuals to converge on one and the same adversary that
all wish to strike down. (TH 26/41, Girard’s emphases)

It would seem that we need to posit the existence of another
subcategory of mimesis alongside acquisitive mimesis: “conflictual” or “antagonistic” mimesis. Oddly, Girard takes this step in
the passage cited, yet he rarely employs the new term in other contexts. Nor does he really address himself to the implications that
this new concept has for his attempt to ground hominid rivalry
and the violent crisis “in the object” (an apparently misunderstood
emphasis stridently asserted only a few pages earlier). It could be
argued that if it was necessary to introduce conflictual mimesis
into the scenario, this was because the patterns of an object-oriented acquisitive mimesis cannot alone generate a crisis of generalized violence within a hominid group, and then its resolution in

a collective murder. The generalized crisis of violence cannot be a
matter of isolated dyads engaged in a reciprocal struggle fueled by
imitation; rather, the link between imitation and aggression must
be more plastic and more volatile. In order for Girard’s mechanism
to work, the agents’ dispositions to behave violently must include
a crucial element of substitution allowing the orientation or target
of the imitated aggression to be transformed, first, to produce a
generalized crisis that no longer has anything to do with appropriation, and second, to allow the agents’ rage to focalize on a substitute victim. Such a hypothesis is coherent, but whether it is empirically correct (or could ever be warranted in such terms) is quite
another matter.

Durkheim and Girard

It may be useful in this context to compare an aspect of Girard’s
thought to Emile Durkheim’s sociology, which Girard has called a
“precious legacy.”!6 Girard’s analysis of the cognitive and motiva-

128 - Models of Desire

tional dimensions of scapegoating is analogous to, but differs significantly from, Durkheim’s perspective on religion. Durkheim
contends that religious beliefs in sacred entities all involve a fundamental misrepresentation (une méconnatssance) of the social group
or totality. In gatherings where individuals experience the powerful emotions of “social effervescence,” it is somehow impossible
for them to believe that such an exaltation could have its source in
the purely profane fact of a social occasion, and hence the members
of the group project that force outside of themselves, identifying
it as the manifestation of some sacred entity. The social totality
is systematically misrepresented, then, and the social system’s
emergent properties are mistaken for transcendent and supernatural powers. Although the concept of méconnaussance is a fundamental part of Durkheim’s analysis of religion and society, he provides only a feeble account of the causes of this systematic error,
basically proposing that the members of the group cannot correctly understand the powerful emotions that they feel because the
social action is “too circuitous and obscure” to grasp.!”7 Durkheim
is not committed, as is sometimes claimed, to the idea that religious

ideology is a necessary consequence of some basic fact of human
psychology, for such an assumption cannot be squared with his
obvious belief that it is possible for some people to understand that
the divinity is but a transfigured image of society. Durkheim also
believed that the historical process of enlightenment was contributing to the demystification of the religious error. Yet he offers no
systematic and plausible account of the social and psychological
conditions that produce either the error or its demystification.
As I have already suggested, Girard also works with a notion of
méconnaissance, but it is not the same as Durkheim’s. What Girard’s

mimetic agents misrepresent is not the “force” that the social totality exercises on the individual but the actions, causal powers, and

identities of mediators and scapegoats. The archetypal supernatural error 1s an exaggeration of some human individual’s ability
to cause a generalized social crisis, and this basic error is motivated
by a perception that the group’s violence against this individual
indeed puts an end to the crisis. Like Durkheim, Girard must deal

with the question of the source of this kind of error; and his claim

129 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

that the error is not universal calls for an explanation of the conditions under which it has been understood.
Let us start with Girard’s views on the origin of the sacrificial
error. Girard’s explanation of the genesis and persistence of that
error is couched, we have seen, in terms of a theory of hominid

mimesis. A conjunction of motor, acquisitive, and conflictual
mimicry produced the configuration of crisis and resolution outlined above, the result being an unprecedented event accompanied
by an unprecedented type of awareness—the sacrificial misrepresentation. But there is a problem here. How can a primitive and

mechanical form of mimesis produce such prodigious cognitive effects as a false belief in the supernatural powers of a particular entity who 1s no longer recognized even by its fellows as a member of
the same species? What Girard calls the first noninstinctual state of
awareness comes on the heels of a crisis having purely mechanical
determinations, those of acquisitive and conflictual mimesis; yet
this crisis and its resolution are said to produce rather prodigious
representational effects insofar as they lead to the group’s misrepresentation of the victim, to its belief in his or her “guilt,” and

to an amazed recognition (reconnaissance émerveillée) of the peace

following the act of collective murder. To the extent that one
stresses the nonrepresentational and nonintentional aspects of the

primordial mimesis, a mechanical theory of hominid agency 1s embraced; yet this analysis is conjoined to a description, in “high”
cognitive language, of the results of the scapegoat mechanism,
results amounting to an ensemble of beliefs, attitudes, symbolic
practices, and actions that are at once cultural and representational. But if the kinds of representational capacities that can be
associated with human culture are in place, why would the sacrificial error be inevitable? Why are the initial beliefs about the victim
always marvelous and erroneous? We must remember that only in
later situations, after the emergence of culture, can a belief in the

victim’s guilt actually motivate a unanimous turning of violence
against one party: no such beliefs are at work in a unanimity generated by a nonrepresentational mimesis. Beliefs in the victim’s
responsibility come later as a representational effect of this more
mechanical form of mimesis.

130 + Models of Desire
Here is Girard’s dilemma. On the one hand, it would seem that

creatures driven by fairly primitive drives and by mimetic facilitations of these drives suddenly acquire higher cognitive capacities
(beliefs, memory, etc.). On the other, it would seem that the first

noninstinctual attention must have been preceded by some fairly

complicated representational capacities. The former option entails
an inexplicable rupture, but the latter makes the creatures’ system-

atic cognitive error a mystery. Girard’s lengthiest explicit statement
on this issue, in which he responds to the question whether the
first victims were already sacrificial victims, reads as follows:
To the extent that the new type of attention is awakened, the victim will be
imbued with the emotions provoked by the crisis and its resolution. The
powerful experience crystallizes around the victim. As weak as it might
be, the “consciousness” the participants have of the victim 1s linked structurally to the prodigious effects produced by its passage from life to death,
by the spectacular and liberating reversal that has occurred at that instant.
The double transference will determine the only possible meaning to take
shape under the circumstances, and this will constitute the sacred and confer total responsibility for the event on to the victim. It is necessary to
conceive of stages, however, which were perhaps the longest in all human
history, in which the signifying effects have still not truly taken shape.
One would have to answer your question by saying that once the victim
has appeared, however dimly, the process leading to the sacred has begun,

although concepts and representations are not yet part of it.
There is no need to assume that the mechanism of awakening attention
works right away; one can imagine that for a considerable period it produced nothing at all, or next to nothing. Nonetheless, the most rudimentary signifying effects result from the necessity of controlling excessive
mimesis; as soon as we grant that these effects can be in the slightest degree cumulative, we will have recognized them as forerunners of forms of
human culture. (TH 100/140)

The passage suggests that we cannot plausibly postulate a sudden leap from a purely mechanical agency (a quasi-osmotic copying of behavior), to the fully fledged cultural significations of the
sacred. Girard does not want a model based on a mysterious “rup-

ture.” Nor does he want a gradualist model where only continuity

131 - Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

is stressed. Yet the passage seems to move in the latter direction.
When does the hominid ever arrive at the sacred? When do concepts, representations, and symbolic misrepresentations finally follow on an act of collective murder? It is not clear how reference to
“a considerable period” matters, given that the murders that finally
do generate the representational meanings and concepts of the sacred must also be the result of the nonrepresentational mimesis if
the latter is to be truly “originary,” that is, if the anthropology is to
remain “rooted in the animal.” The only rupture for Girard is the
collective murder, which he finds missing in those animal rituals
that display the same mechanisms that, when carried one step
further, produce the generative events. Thus, the creature that is

driven to participate in a collective murder without representational guidance must also be the creature who will experience the
significations of the earliest sacred representations. But how is this
possible?
One way to respond to this question is to point to a concurrent
development of representational capacities alongside the increase
in more mechanical forms of mimesis. On its own, the theory of an
externally prompted and rather mechanical mimesis offers an incomplete explanation of complex beliefs and delayed, symbolic

forms of modeling because different processes are at work in
them.!8 In other words, the increase in hominid brain size may
very well have resulted in an increase in acquisitive mimesis, but
not in it alone, if this increase is to have produced organisms capable of sacred beliefs as well as actions motivated by these beliefs.
The error would be to think that Girard’s stress on the increase in
mimesis must be taken as an exhaustive characterization of the impact of the increase in brain size on the hominids in question—as
if the system of motivation determined by mimesis were the only
behavioral system in the organism.!? As the tendency toward mimesis in certain types of situations increases, an increased capacity
for simulation or modeling of events in the environment emerges.
What we need to imagine is a creature who is in many ways
already very intelligent and inventive. This is a creature whose interaction with the physical environment does not comprise a very
limited repertory of motor responses generated by a purely me-

132 - Models of Desire

chanical form of agency. As Bandura puts it, “A theory that denies
that thoughts can regulate actions does not lend itself readily to the
explanation of complex human behavior.”?° The hominid in question, then, already has well-developed capacities for memory, abstraction, forethought, and intentional and purposive action. It

probably has a tool-making capacity as well as a complex ability to
orient itself in its natural environment, to undertake prolonged activities requiring planning and memory. There is evidence, for example, that Homo erectus (Lower Pleistocene, one million years

ago) transported raw materials for stone axes from sites where they
were available to the base camps where they would be used, the
distances ranging up to sixty kilometers. Gowlett infers from these
data that these creatures must have had “mental maps” of fairly
extensive geographical areas, as well as a capacity for planning and
foresight over at least a day or more.?! Such capacities outstrip a
stimulus-driven form of mechanical agency. Yet we may at the
same time imagine this creature as being prone to what may appear to us as a form of motivational rigidity in certain of its interactions with its fellow creatures; the rigid patterns that Girard attributes to acquisitive and conflictual mimesis at times totally
govern its interaction with its fellows. One way to put this would
be to say that what comes last is a capacity for higher-level social
representations, such as beliefs about the nature of the relations in
which the organism is engaged, and of course a reflexive concept of
self and a representation of the group as a whole. After all, the
most intelligent creatures, the inventors of extremely sophisticated
representational systems, frequently rely, in a highly unreflective
manner, on very basic and repetitive patterns of social interaction
(examples would be the rigid and automatic nature of certain fairly
common forms of joking behavior or the interactions prompted
by such emotions as anger). Why should the earliest hominids not
also combine a complex, instrumental knowledge of features of
the environment with a social order that is in some ways highly
rigid and involves little self-knowledge? Would we not in this regard often resemble them? I recommend, then, a modified ap-

proach to the development of cognitive capacities in the process of
hominization, namely, one that does not view the higher cognitive

133 + Mimesis and the Origin of Culture

faculties as being generated or determined by primitive and mechanical forms of motivational mimesis. Instead, behavior emerges
from the complex interplay of different cognitive, motivational,
and affective subsystems.
These remarks have important implications for Girard’s ap-

proach to the second of Durkheim’s two problems, namely, that of
explaining how any human being could ever escape from the kind
of méconnaissance that is fatally produced by the mimetic mechanism. Girard does not believe in a deus ex machina: the mimetic
machine cannot produce a genuine and comprehensive knowledge
of its own workings. Sacrificial cultures could never arrive at a lucid self-reflection without the influence, from without, of a truly

divine revelation, because the system of mimetic interaction functions as a closed system: “No system of thought can truly think the
thought that is capable of destroying it” (BE 289). The revelation
of the innocence of the scapegoat transcends the purely human and
social domain, for it is a divine being—the Christ—who announces, in word and deed, the falsehood of the archaic form of

the sacred. Girard does not claim that myth and ritual were effectively demystified from that moment on, and he admits that Christendom has in many ways functioned as a sacrificial institution—
beginning with a sacrificial misinterpretation of Christ’s murder.
But he claims that in principle the mythical illusions were debunked by Christ’s message, which has continued to exercise a
“subterranean influence” in spite of the sacrificial distortions:
“Men did not stop hunting witches because they invented science;
they invented science because they stopped hunting witches. The
scientific spirit, like the spirit of economic enterprise, is a by-product of the deep subterranean influence that has been exercised by
the evangelical text” (BE 285).
Girard seems to be arguing that his very strong hypothesis
about divine intervention in history is in part warranted because it
is the only way to explain how such a tremendous historical transformation could have been possible. Given the closed and selfreproducing system of mimesis, 7 follows that the cause of the change
had to come from outside the system. But at least two powerful
objections to this argument must be entertained: (1) the mimetic

134 - Models of Desire

system of thought and behavior was not in fact a closed system
incapable of generating significant changes in belief and social apperception; and (2) the historical transformation of human mimesis has not been as radical as Girard contends. Objection 1 may be
supported, for example, by noting that the fundamental méconnasssance of scapegoating was from the start only a contingent fact
about human mimesis, even if it was highly prevalent. It certainly
has not been established that such an error was a universal feature
of human cognition until the advent of Jesus Christ.?* Objection 2
may be supported by the observation that many instances of the
very same méconnaissance can be identified in the contemporary
social world, beginning with the economic institutions that are
supposed to be a by-product of the Christian revelation.?3 In
short, mimesis never determined the sacred as a universal and

closed system of belief, and no extra-human cause was required to
make it possible for some people to recognize some scapegoats as
scapegoats.
To sum up, I would like to dissociate the recognition of important, recurrent patterns of mimetic motivation and interaction
from the idea that human thought and history have been driven by
a closed and binding mimetic mechanism. I do not think that we
require theological posits to explain the complexity, openness, and
indeterminacy of human evolution and history. In the next chapter, I further develop my argument concerning the explanatory
status of mimetic patterns, focusing in particular on claims about
the determination of cycles of violent retribution.

Chapter Five

Desire, Violence,
and Revenge

In the foregoing chapters I have sought to elucidate and develop
some of the concepts that may be associated with Girard’s analyses
of mimesis. In this final chapter I shall take up in more detail what
is perhaps one of Girard’s most significant and controversial
claims, namely, that mimetic desire is the source of at least the
largest part of violent and aggressive forms of interaction. Although chapter 4 includes a discussion of some of Girard’s hypotheses about the links between acquisitive and conflictual mimesis in
precultural settings, the following analysis will focus on the relations between mimetic desire and violence within cultural contexts.
Girard has on occasion asserted quite explicitly that mimetic desire necessarily involves rivalry and conflict. Thus we read that
“mimesis coupled with desire leads automatically to conflict” (VS
146/205). Girard also states that “mimetism is a source of continual conflict. By making one man’s desire into a replica of another man’s desire, it invariably leads to rivalry; and rivalry in turn
transforms desire into violence” (VS 169/235). And elsewhere he
makes the same point: “To imitate the desires of someone else is to

turn this someone else into a rival as well as a model. From the
convergence of two or more desires on the same object, conflict
must necessarily arise” (DBB 140).
These very general assertions are contradicted, however, by the
possibility of cases in which an agent imitates a model’s desire
135

136 - Models ofDesire

without there being the slightest element of rivalry or conflict between them. As I argued in chapter 2, a general model of mimetic
desire embraces both “imitative” and “emulative” types of desire,
or in other words, both external and internal forms of mediation.

Only the latter is essentially conflictual. The category of nonconflictual mimetic desire is constituted by those situations where
two or more agents’ desires are of a certain sort, namely, those sit-

uations in relation to which the satisfaction of one agent’s desire
does not exclude the simultaneous success of the other’s desire.
Two subcategories of nonconflictual, imitative desiring may be
distinguished: on the one hand, cases where two or more desires

may be successfully satisfied by means of a cooperative venture; on
the other hand, instances that we have described as hierarchical.

Here it is the desiring agent’s beliefs about the model, and about
the agent’s own relation to the model, that preclude any form of
emulative desire in relation to that model. Moreover, in a hier-

archical mimetic relation, although there is a difference between
the two agents’ desires, the objects sought by them partake of a
single schema in which the agents take hierarchically different
roles.
The fact is that Girard recognizes the existence of nonconflictual instances of mimetic desire in his discussion of external mediation, which he explicitly characterizes in terms of the impossibility
of there being any rivalry between model and imitator. Insofar as
external mediation is indeed a form of mimetic desire, it follows

that not all mimetic desire “leads necessarily” to conflict. How,
then, should we understand Girard’s statements to the contrary?
The intimate link that Girard insists exists between mimetic desire
and rivalry should perhaps be understood as a state of affairs holding within a more restricted context. In this regard it is significant
that one of his most insistent statements about the competitive nature of mimetic desire figures in a passage that assigns the entirety
of desire to a particular sociohistorical domain:
Desire . . . corresponds not so much to mimetic crises as they occur in
primitive societies but to something at once similar and very different,
which is linked to the lasting enfeeblement of founding violence within

137

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

our own world. The Judeo-Christian texts have produced a disintegration, whose effect has, however, been slowed down and moderated by the
churches’ sacrificial reading. . . .

Desire is what happens to human relationships when there is no longer
any resolution through the victim, and consequently no form of polarization that is genuinely unanimous and can trigger such a resolution. But
human relationships are mimetic none the less. We shall be able to discover, beneath the ‘underground? (in the Dostoevskyan sense) and always
deceptive form of individual symptoms, the dynamic style of the sacrificial
crisis. In this instance, however, there can be no ritualistic or victimary
resolution, and, if and when it becomes acute, the crisis ensues— what we

call psychosis.
Desire is the mimetic crisis in itself, it is the acute mimetic rivalry with
the other that occurs in all the circumstances we call ‘private’, ranging
from eroticism to professional or intellectual ambition. (TH 288/407—8)

The passage suggests that Girard’s analysis of mimetic desire, as
well as his claims about its intimate link to crisis, conflict, and psychopathology, rest on any number of broad anthropological and
historical theses. Desire is said to be a phenomenon constituted at
a particular moment of human history, and it is clear from Girard’s
terminology that the specification of this cultural moment requires
reference to the tenets of Girard’s other hypotheses. For example,
desire is analyzed in reference to a particular stage in the dissolution of a prior cultural order that was organized by cycles of crises
and by their resolution through victimization. Thus it could seem
that if we do not already assume along with Girard that the development of cultural life in modern civilization is essentially a story
of the modalities of the decline of the sacrificial institutions of
archaic cultures, then we will not be able to approach the phenom-

ena of desire and psychopathology within the right context.
Such a conclusion would be necessary if our goal here were
merely to interpret Girard faithfully; it would also be necessary in
that case to try to flesh out his story about the subterranean influence of the evangelical text, which is said to be responsible for undermining the sacrificial institutions in spite of the churches’ tendency to give a sacrificial reading of Christ’s message. It would be

138 - Models ofDesire

necessary as well to say how this undermining is conjoined with
the characteristically modern appearance of “underground” forms
of mimetic crisis.1 But my goal here is not simply to interpret
Girard faithfully; rather, I want to see how certain aspects of his
intuitions about mimesis can be reconstructed in a way that makes
them logically independent in relation to certain of his substantive
claims about the overarching dynamics of History and Revelation.
Thus I do not restrict the application of the term “desire” to any
particular period of human history, and I include in the model of
mimetic desire the assumption that this motivational state could
meaningfully be attributed to the members of archaic societies living long before the emergence of Christianity. Moreover, I do not
assume that all forms of mimetic desire that involve external mediation are necessarily culpable because they occur within the context of a “violent, sacrificial culture.” Here I have in mind the idea

that external mediation is not a solution to the problem of mimetic
violence because its condition of possibility is scapegoating. I am
certainly in agreement with the idea that there is too much violence and injustice in the present world order, but I am not sure
that this proposition entails the notion that all forms of external
mediation are suspect. I think, on the contrary, that it is a good
idea to hold open the possibility that some of the beliefs that can
motivate a nonemulative form of imitation are neither delusory
nor reprehensible. For example, it would be reductive to castigate
the broad range of interactions and values that one may associate
with “education” because they are necessarily forms of “deviated
transcendence.”
Girard may be right to stress certain particular ways in which
Christian beliefs have brought about a fundamental change in the
sociocultural institutions of the Western world; indeed, to deny
this very basic point would seem foolish. It is another thing entirely to argue for the truth of some subset of these beliefs (e.g., the
divinity of Christ), and I am unpersuaded by Girard’s efforts along
these lines. Moreover, it seems quite reductive to think that the key
to sociohistorical modernity lies primarily in the influence of some
true beliefs about victimization, a claim that is further complicated
by the obscurity of the very idea of a “subterranean” influence,

139

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

which suggests that it is not a matter of the influence of beliefs at
all. Girard is to be congratulated when he employs the language of
“hypothesis,” but a hypothesis is not a bold idea, or a guess, or a
seemingly plausible speculation; even less is it a leap of faith. A
rigorous use of the language of hypothesis requires some epistemological and methodological considerations having to do with
whether the views in question could ever be meaningfully brought
into confrontation with something like “evidence” and made the
object of some process of rational and empirical justification.
Herein resides my fundamental divergence from a certain tendency in Girard’s thought, for I do not think it methodologically
prudent to link the model of mimetic desire to articles of faith or
to vast generalizations about the course of human history. Even if
these statements happened to be true, they are not justified in the
sense that there is not today any reasonable warrant for believing
in them.
Yet I do not mean to imply that the model of mimetic desire can
be totally separated from any and all assumptions of a sociohistor1cal nature. Rather, the point is that at the present time the theory
of mimetic desire should only be linked to a much broader and
much looser sociohistorical framework, one allowing for any
number of adjustments and specifications. Thus I think it possible
to state that all the mimetic hypothesis requires is that we adopt
whatever sociohistorical assumptions are necessary for it to make
sense to speak of there being social conditions (e.g., institutions
and systems of belief) under which external mediation and internal mediation are possible (but not necessarily in the same contexts). It may very well make sense to think that in truly archaic
cultures, external mediation was the rule, whereas in modern so-

cieties of “equality in principle” and “competition in fact,” internal mediation has become the most commonplace mimetic configuration. This kind of broad hypothesis seems perfectly warranted
as long as one is talking about broad tendencies or trends, which
could easily be supported by reference to many important examples. But there is a tendency in Girard’s rhetoric to speak about
transitions from external to internal forms of mediation as if they
were the manifestations of some kind of fundamental nomic pat-

140 + Models of Desire

tern, and this at both the global historical and personal levels.
Thus, the passage from external to internal mediation becomes the
overarching and ineluctable tendency of History, a tendency that
can only be halted by the “choice” of a truly vertical form of transcendence. On other occasions, Girard speaks as if mimesis were a

disease that moved through a series of pathological stages, progressing from external to increasingly internal forms of mediation,

until finally the desiring agent would go mad. The assumption in
both cases is that external forms of mediation are inherently unstable and necessarily transform themselves into internal mediation
by means of some kind of internal dynamic. Yet this seers an inadequate hypothesis concerning the nature of social and individual
change. In the cases of some societies and some individuals, in-

stances of external mediation may last a very long time, and thus
one needs to look for those conditions that do effectively destabilize hierarchical beliefs.
My central point here is that the very real interest of Girard’s
own insights is sometimes obscured by some unnecessarily ambitious, second-order claims about their explanatory range. And
these claims are too ambitious for two major reasons: first, because

the theory of the dynamics and mechanisms of mimetic desire has
never been accompanied by an actual, detailed mechanistic model
of the psychic stages and transitional laws in question and hence
the nomic rhetoric is a blank check; and second, because there are

ample reasons to assume that the actual manifestations of the putative mechanism are massively overdetermined by factors extra-

neous to the model. The latter cannot be presented, then, as the
determining or autonomous mechanism producing phenomena
as complex as personal and world-historical change, even if it
may indeed constitute an important subset of their conditions.
In short, if mimetic desire produces conflict, rivalry, and violence,

it only does so under certain conditions and in conjunction with
factors that are the product of histories and contingencies that
themselves are not fully explicable in terms of a single mimetic
mechanism. At both the personal and historical levels, it is an unwarranted reduction to point to a single mechanism as the cause
of some overarching tendency or movement. Girard reproaches

141

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

Freud and modern psychiatry for their “Platonism,” by which he
means a tendency to posit the existence of abstract psychic forms
that bear no dynamic relation to each other or to the pragmatic
conditions of intersubjective relations. This is very good, but
Girard himself sometimes flirts with a kind of “Augustinianism,”
by which I mean a tendency to indulge in eschatological psychohistories.?

Mimetic Desire and Revenge
Girard’s analyses of the links between mimetic desire and violence
specify that certain typical interactive patterns are generated by
mimesis. Of particular interest in the present context are his statements about the patterns that may be associated with revenge and
with what he refers to as the “imitative cycle of violence.” We may
ask how, more specifically, these typical interactive sequences are
explained in terms of mimetic desire. Taking up this question at
some length here will serve a dual function: on the one hand, we
may consider whether it is coherent and plausible to think that the
hypothesis of mimetic desire promises to shed light on an important type of social phenomenon; and on the other, we will see how

the model may be inflected and fleshed out in the discussion of a
particular context of interaction. My point of focus in what follows will not be the empirical validity of Girard’s emphasis on the
importance of cycles of violence (or blood feud) in archaic (and
modern) cultural formations nor the conclusions he draws con-

cerning the historical destiny of the various institutions that function to channel or control aggression. Implicit in my decision to
focus on Girard’s analysis of revenge is the assumption that Girard’s emphasis on this issue is well justified. What I shall be discussing in the present context, however, is not simply the emphasis
on cycles of violence but the attempt to forge an explanatory link
between revenge and the theory of mimetic motivation.

The link between mimesis and vengeance is only implicit in the
long discussion of revenge at the beginning of Violence and the Sacred; nor is it developed at any great length elsewhere in Girard’s

142 + Models of Desire

writings, in spite of the fact that the claim that mimesis can produce extremely disruptive cycles of revenge is crucial to his more
general sociohistorical claims. Let us look at one of Girard’s
lengthier and more explicit statements in this regard:
If the transcendence of the judicial institution is no longer there, if the
institution loses its efficacy or becomes incapable of commanding respect,
the imitative and repetitious character of violence becomes manifest once
more; the imitative character of violence is in fact most manifest in explicit
violence, where it acquires a formal perfection it had not previously possessed. At the level of the blood feud, in fact, there is always only one act,
murder, which is performed in the same way for the same reasons, in

vengeful imitation of the preceding murder. And this imitation propagates itself by degrees. It becomes a duty for distant relatives who had
nothing to do with the original act, if in fact an original act can be identified; it surpasses limits in space and time and leaves destruction everywhere in its wake; 1t moves from generation to generation. In such cases,
in its perfection and paroxysm mimesis becomes a chain reaction of vengeance, in which human beings are constrained to the monotonous repetition of homicide. Vengeance turns them into doubles. (TH 12/21—22)

How, then, is revenge generated by mimetic desire? In a typical
sequence of violent revenge, who is imitating whom? How, exactly, does the murderous

repetition and imitation to which

Girard refers work? To approach such questions, even with the
goal of arriving at a purely schematic and hypothetical model, it
would be useful to refer to something like a typical or at least
somewhat exemplary cycle of revenge or blood feud. To that end, I
will follow Girard’s lead by focusing the analysis on a fictional representation of a feud, my assumption being, not that the analysis of
a literary text can serve as an empirical proof or refutation of the
mimetic theory, but that such a reference to a text can serve as a
useful heuristic in the clarification and formation of the hypothetical model.
My example comes from Brennu-Nyals Saga, perhaps one of the
most well known of the so-called “family sagas” from medieval
Iceland.* Written around the year 1285, the saga situates the events
that it recounts at a much earlier time—roughly a few decades be-

143

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

fore and after the formal adoption of Christianity by the Althing,
or general assembly, in 999. In its depiction of the earlier period,
the saga is at times strictly anachronistic, yet it also seems that
some of the events it relates may have had some basis in the history

of the island. Such commentators as Rolf Heller lay great stress on
the literary and artificial nature of the events recounted in the saga,
but others believe that important aspects of medieval Icelandic culture do shine through. Jesse Byock writes that “it would be incorrect to assume that the events narrated in the family sagas really
_ happened, but accepting the sagas as revealing the tensions and
dynamics of a rural medieval society is a different matter.” That the
sagas are the product of a society where feuds were an essential
part of the social dynamics seems undeniable. As Byock has argued, “Iceland organized its judicial apparatus, indeed its entire
society, to assist and expedite the resolution of feud.”5 Moreover,

Byock and other specialists, such as Lars Lonnroth, argue convincingly that the actions and motifs related to feuding provide some
of the most essential narrative elements of the family sagas, which
makes these texts particularly relevant to any reader interested in
the structures of revenge. Another scholar who takes the sagas’ depictions of feuding quite seriously is William Miller, who, following Carol Clover, presents detailed arguments for what he calls a
“balance-sheet model” of feuding.® In the present context, my interest in an example of a saga’s depiction of feuds lies in its pertinence for a hypothetical model: what we are after is conceptual
clarifications, not empirical evidence or justification, and thus the
question of the accuracy of the text’s references to historical Iceland need not delay us any further.”
The sequence of feuding to be discussed occupies eleven chapters of Njala (35—45) and hinges upon a prolonged conflict between two women, Bergbora, the wife of Njall, and Hallgerdr, the
wife of Gunnarr. I shall recapitulate the main points of the action
before proceeding to my analysis. The women’s husbands are close
friends and allies; for example, in the episodes leading up to the
feud, Njall’s advice proves of great service to Gunnarr. The two
families share land, and at the time when the feud begins, they
have a tradition of taking turns in staging a yearly autumn banquet

144 - Models of Desire

for each other. It is precisely on such an occasion that the enmity
between the two wives breaks out. (We are given no indication of
any earlier friction or tension between

them.) Bergbora,

the

hostess of the feast, orders Hallgerdr to make room for the wife of
Helgi, Bergbora’s son, who has just arrived. It should be noted that

this gesture occurs in a culture where the seating arrangements at
banquets were highly charged with meaning, being understood as
direct expressions of social rank and priority (a fact that is evident
in the chapter preceding the one in which the quarrel begins,
where we are given a careful description of the seating at another
gathering). Hallgerdr is likely to interpret Bergbora’s gesture,

then, as implying that Bergbora grants the younger woman precedence over Hallgerdr in Bergbora’s home. Hallgerdr indeed responds that she will not move because she does not want to be
made into a hornkerling, or, basically, one of the old women who

have to sit in a corner to make room for others. Bergbora angrily
retorts that she is in charge in her own home. Hallgerdr then directly insults Bergbora, saying that Bergbora and Njall are a good

match because she has a man’s fingernails and he is beardless.
Bergbora answers with yet another insult: Hallgerdr’s former husband may not have been beardless, but this did not stop Hallgerdr

from causing his death (Hallgerdr had indeed incited her foster
father to kill her first husband following a quarrel she had with
him). Hallgerdr then calls upon her husband, Gunnarr, to avenge
the insult that Bergbora has just made, but he angrily refuses, and
the two guests leave, both women swearing that the affair is any-

thing but settled.
The next incident in the feud takes place months later, while the
two husbands are away at the Althing. The two families jointly
own a forest, each family cutting wood there when necessary.
Bergbora orders one of her servants, Svartr, to go there and cut

wood, and some beggars who learn of this happen to tell HalIgerdr. Saying that Bergbora intends to rob her, Hallgerdr has one
of her servants, Kolr, kill Svartr. Hallgerdr herself sends a messenger to the Althing to tell her husband about the murder. But
the two husbands quickly reach an agreement about the necessary
retribution: Gunnarr grants Njall sja/fdemi, the right to make a

145

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

judgment on the matter without outside arbitration. Njall then
awards himself the modest sum of twelve ounces of silver, a stan-

dard payment in retribution for a slave. Njall stipulates that if Gunnarr should ever be in a similar position, he should judge just as
leniently.
This is precisely what happens, one year later at the next Althing. Hallgerdr has been boasting all year about the murder of
Svartr, which infuriates Bergbora, who hires a freedman, Atli, to

kill Kolr. When the news of this murder reaches the Thing, Njall
~ approaches his friend Gunnarr and offers him sja/fdemie. Gunnarr
keeps his promise, awarding himself the same amount as he paid
out the year before. He notes that Njall pays him with the very
same coins that he had given Njall. Returning home, the men,
who remain good friends, argue with their wives. Bergbora says
she will never let Hallgerdr get the upper hand, and Hallgerdr
berates her husband for making a settlement with Njall.
A year later, Hallgerdr makes the next move. She gets Brynjolfr,
a relative, to come and serve as overseer of her farm and goads him
into killing Atl. Once more, Gunnarr keeps the peace by offering

Njall the right to name the price, and Njall sets the amount at one
hundred ounces of silver, a much higher amount because Atli was

not a slave. The husbands and wives again disagree over the settlement. Another year passes, and Bergbora goads bordr, another

man in the Njall household (the foster father of Njall’s own sons),
into killing Brynjolfr. Again the men reach an agreement at the

Thing, and the same amount changes hands, Gunnarr awarding
himself one hundred silvers.
Anticipating his wife’s next move, Gunnarr sends warnings
to bdordr, but in vain: pbdérdr sees his fetch; he is ambushed

and killed by three men who have been goaded into action by
Hallgerdr. The killers are Sigmundr, one of Gunnarr’s relatives
(his mother’s cousin), and his Swedish friend Skgldr. With them 1s
prainn, another of Gunnarr’s relatives, who looks on as the others

fight (an action which, following the written law of the period,
amounted to full complicity in the murder). At the Thing, Njall
grants himself two hundred silvers for the murder of his sons’ foster father. The men pledge friendship once more.

146 - Models of Desire

After a period of calm, some nomadic beggar women happen to
visit the farm of Gunnarr and Hallgerdr. Claiming that they have
just passed by Njall’s farm, they inflame Hallgerdr by making fun
of Njall and saying that his sons are preparing for battle. At Hallgerdr’s instigation, Sigmundr composes an insulting poem about
Njall and his sons. The beggars next visit Njall’s place, and without
being asked, they tell Bergbéra about the insulting poem. She stirs
up the wrath of her four sons, who, angered by the poem, go out
and kill Sigmundr and Skgldr. But Gunnarr refuses to seek any
compensation, in spite of his wife’s goadings, and three years pass.
Njall then takes the initiative and proposes compensation to Gunnarr in the form of two hundred silvers, and the two men pledge
friendship. This friendship is not broken in the events that follow
in the saga; indeed, Njall and his sons support Gunnarr in the next
bloody feud in which Hallgerdr embroils him, a feud that leads to
his death.

The Dynamics ofRivalry

The feud described by the saga certainly presents some of the general characteristics emphasized by Girard. The story moves back
and forth between essentially three types of settings, which may be
taken to represent three categories of action: first, the respective
households, where, in scenes of /vet (from hvetja, “to whet”), the
women incite their servants and then their relatives to seek violent
revenge; second, the various places where the bloody conflicts occur, always ending in murder; and finally, the annual Althing,
where the two husbands make peace with each other by paying
retribution. That the agreements between the men occur at the
Thing is suggestive ofthe judiciary system’s function in constraining the destructive conflict brought by blood feud. Njall and Gunnarr have a firm vindtta, that is, a bond of friendship that allies
them despite the feud that rages between their households. Although at the end of the sequence of events equal sums of money
have been given and received, the payments in retribution serve to
stabilize the interaction, allowing a nonviolent means of measur-

147 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge

ing the terms of the relationship. The wives’ machinations stand in
a functional opposition to the Thing and to the dealings between
the husbands that occur there: whereas the women’s actions serve
to carry the violence one step forward at each point, the transactions occurring at the Thing serve to stabilize the relation between
the two families by means of financial repayments and pledges of
good will. It is important to insist on this functional opposition
between the judiciary system and the feud. Clover (1986), for example, who focuses her analysis primarily on an incident occur. ring later in the same saga— Hildigunnr’s lament— insists that the
women in the saga are alienated from the men’s agreements and
juridical system. This point may be underscored, for there is a tendency in the sociological and anthropological literature on revenge and feuding to make violent reprisals into a fully codified
and systemic social process, an uninterrupted manifestation of a
structure of exchange.® Thus Byock suggests 1n passing that feuding 1s a “socially stabilizing process.”? Vengeance is seen as an orderly relationship of exchange instead of as a form of reciprocity
that, if unchecked, could put an end to any nonviolent interaction
between groups. In the case under discussion, while it is true that
the actions of Bergbora and Hallgerdr are in many ways guided by
the norms and codes of their culture, their desires for revenge represent a serious threat to the order that Njall and others like him
seek to protect. It is important to remember that it was prolonged,
violent feuding between powerful clans that had totally destabilized Icelandic society by the thirteenth century, leading the
way to the island’s domination by Norway." Finally, in spite of the
impression that may be given by the example under discussion,
neither Njala nor the Icelandic sagas in general consistently depict
women as the primary instigators of revenge.!!
After ten chapters and seven murders ranging over a period of
about eight years, the agreement between Njall and Gunnarr manages to stabilize the situation, temporarily putting an end to the
feud between Bergpora and Hallgerdr at a stage where the monies
paid and received by both sides are equal. But the feud is far from
over. If Hallgerdr stops inciting her people to attack Bergbora’s,
her attention turns elsewhere, and Gunnarr’s entanglements in

148 - Models of Desire

feuding have only just begun. Moreover, Njall’s sons have not yet
fully settled accounts, and a murder occurring fifteen years later
may be linked back to prainn’s role in the murder of their foster

father.!
Roughly speaking, the cycle of violence is made possible, as
Girard suggests, by the inefficiency of the judiciary process, which
is not fully “transcendent” in relation to the family quarrel. The
two women do not respect any of the agreements made at the
Thing, nor are the formal judgments and pledges respected by
those men who let themselves be egged on to acts of murder, often
against their own wishes and better judgment. It is also true that
remote members of the family are dragged into a quarrel that,

from another perspective, hardly seems to concern them: they are
in a sense total strangers to the dispute between the two women,

but this does not stop the conflict from leading to their death. It is
also the case that the violence moves closer and closer to the immediate relatives of the parties concerned. Girard emphasizes the repetitive character of the murders, the symmetrical structure of the
action, and the tendency of the cycle to escalate from relation to
relation, all of which correspond to features of the feud described

in this text.
The series of violent actions that take place in the saga support
Girard’s stress on the extent to which rivalry, which may or may
not have a starting point in some material object, can become
wholly detached from any quest for material advantage, turning
instead on notions of honor, personal priority, and prestige. Indeed, the “original action” in the feud is an insult that concerns the
social ranking of two women at a banquet, yet such a small incident leads to no fewer than seven murders! What is it, in fact, that

gets the conflict going? Given the social norms and relations that
are already in place at the time, Bergbora’s initial request that Hal-

lgerdr move over for a younger woman, who is also Bergb6ra’s
own relative, can only be understood by Hallgerdr as an affront to
her pride—a pride that is, according to both the narrator of the

saga and some of the other characters, quite exaggerated. Whence
the violence of Hallgerdr’s refusal and her escalation of the quarrel

149 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge

by insulting Bergbora and her husband. The “object” of the quarrel is nothing other than the women’s rank or status in relation to
each other, and the quarrel is fueled by the great importance both
women attach to this issue.
The significance of this kind of rivalry to the patterns of feud in
medieval Iceland has been usefully acknowledged by Byock, in

spite of his occasional tendency to emphasize those cases in the
sagas where the material goods at stake provide a powerful incentive to fighting (and it is certainly important to recognize along
. with Byock that there are many such cases in the texts). Byock at
one point argues that the frequency of feuding in this culture is
best explained by the scarcity of material goods and most of all, by
the “need” for land.!3 Yet some interesting cases do not exactly correspond to Byock’s idea, for the Landnamabok (a text depicting the
“land taking” during the settlement of Iceland) refers to several
instances where individuals preferred to fight for land rather than
receive it as a gift. The motivation behind such an unfortunate
preference was not a “need” but a number of far-reaching beliefs
about the social and personal implications of gifts: it was thought
that in certain contexts, to receive a gift was to be indebted, sometimes even humiliated, and the proud man preferred to fight. For
example, in one text a newcomer in Iceland named Halkel spends
his first winter with a relative, Ketilbjarn, who then offers him land

of his own. Considering it unmanly (ltdmannlight) to accept such
an offer, Halkel instead challenges his host to a duel, kills him, and

takes over his estate.!* It is clear that many of the most important
feuds described in the sagas have no basis 1n the objective scarcity
of land or any other commodity. For example, Njall and Gunnarr
seem to have no problem in peacefully sharing a commodity that is
usually said to have been quite scarce on the island— wood— until
the two wives’ pride comes into play. But the point is perhaps already implicitly granted by Byock, who notes that “conflicts that
started over material goods often turned into feuds involving issues of power and honor, while ongoing feuds between powerful
men were often fueled by smaller conflicts over material goods between less important persons. Insult, killing, horse fighting, and

150 - Models ofDesire

harboring an outlaw were frequent causes for violent clashes.
Honor, in all such cases, demanded that a man preserve his reputa-

tion and guard his family name.”!

Feuding and Imitation

We are now in a position to raise our central question: if the feud
described in the saga is characterized by some of the main features
stipulated in Girard’s theory of cycles of violence, how does this
description stand in relation to his insistence on the role of mimesis in generating such patterns? Are the two women and the other
agents involved behaving mimetically, and if so, who 1s imitating
whom at each stage of the action? Please note that as I flesh out
aspects of the story’s content, I am asking, not whether the saga’s
author thought about the characters in terms of mimesis, but how
Girard’s model is to be concretized if the actions directly reported
by the text are to be given a plausible mimetic reading. Nor am I
asking whether my interpretation of the story, which is of course
not the only one that is compatible with the text’s explicit indications, somehow confirms or disproves the mimetic theory.
Bergbora insults Hallgerdr, telling her to move over to make
room for a younger woman in the household, expressing a definition of their social ranks that does not correspond to Hallgerdr’s
sense of her own place in the scheme of things. The narrative gives
us a glimpse into Hallgerdr’s reasoning when she decides to launch
the first attack, for we read that she tells herself that Bergbora is
trying to “rob” her. The object of this “theft,” however, is not any
particular thing at all—uit is certainly not the wood that the luckless woodcutter would have taken from the forest shared by the
two families. Rather, Hallgerdr’s accusation is more diffuse and
general: Bergbora, she complains, thinks that she is going to rob
her “in everything.”!6 The literal forms of acquisitive desire are in
the background here, but they are not the primary motives.
Whom 1s Bergpbora imitating, then, when she first insults Hallgerdr? What is her desire, and who is her model? The text tells us

nothing about any events in their previous dealings that could

151 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge
have conditioned or otherwise motivated Bergbora’s action, and

we could only speculate about any antecedents of the initial insult.
Whatever the motives, Bergb6ra’s statement manifests an implicit
comment on Hallgerdr’s status, a desire to “put her in her place,” a
place that Hallgerdr clearly does not recognize as being her own.
Let us move on then, to Hallgerdr’s response, which amounts to
publicly belittling her host and hostess. What is Hallgerdr’s desire
here? Is she imitating Bergbdra? Does her action match Bergp6ra’s
or surpass it?
It could be argued that there is no question of imitation here,
since the women’s actions at each step in the rivalry display significant differences. Bergbora asks Hallgerdr to move over for someone, and the response is an extremely violent piece of slander.
(Assailing Njall’s manliness by referring to his lack of a beard was
a particularly aggressive action in Icelandic society.)!”? Bergbéra
then insults Hallgerdr, and Hallgerdr responds by having a servant murder one of Bergpora’s thralls, no small escalation. At a

later stage there would seem to be yet another major case of a significant difference between action and reaction. When Hallgerdr
gets one of her relatives to kill Atli, Bergbora’s next move is to call
on pordr, the foster father of Njall’s sons, and she can hardly fail to
see that should Hallgerdr act against bordr, her sons will get involved in the feud—and everything she knows about Hallgerdr
tells us that p6rdr is the next man on the list. For this reason,

Bergbora’s choice of bordr amounts to a serious escalation of the
feud. Can we speak of imitation, then, when the response to an
antecedent action is qualitatively different from that action? Are
these really instances of matching the other’s action or of doing the
same thing? One could reasonably be skeptical on this score.
Perhaps it is better to say that each action matches the previous
one precisely because it surpasses it. For example, from Bergpb6ra’s
perspective, Hallgerdr has carried things one step further with her
first insult, but from Hallgerdr’s point of view, the situation is
more or less even only after she has made mock of Bergbora’s nails
and Njall’s lack of a beard. Her reasoning? Basically, she reckons
that Bergbora has tried to belittle her, to assert priority over her;
with her insult Hallgerdr has “merely” turned the tables, inverting

152 - Models of Desire

their places within the same schema of ranking. In expressing herself in terms implying that she is superior to Bergbora, Hallgerdr is
“doing the same thing” that Bergb6ra just did to her, because only
a truly inferior guest could be shuffled around and told to move
over. The motivations—a desire to get the upper hand—are
highly similar.
The same analysis may be applied to the next move, and perhaps
to many of the subsequent ones as well: Bergb6ora makes an insult
that is even more extreme, for she publicly refers to the fact that
Hallgerdr had goaded her foster father into killing her first husband. In her view, she has to respond very strongly to this if she
does not want to lose face. Had Bergbora chosen an action that
stressed the equality of the two women’s positions, this would not
have been perceived as a matching of the rival’s last action, which

was an implicit bid for first place, not equality; thus from Bergpora’s ’s perspective, she must try to top Hallgerdr, for anything

else amounts to having allowed Hallgerdr to humiliate her. In this
context, then, matching the other’s action means escalating the
rivalry by repeating the bid for first place.
Thus there is a clear sense in which we can say that although the
women’s actions are different, and increasingly more extreme, at
each step, they desire similar things. The similarity in question exists at the level of the implicit goals and preferences subtending
both women’s behavior. Each woman thinks that she cannot afford
to lose face, and to allow the other to make a bid for priority without being punished for it is indeed to lose face; the only way to
punish someone properly for having made such a bid is to claim, in
turn, priority over that person. The only parity is disparity, for a
response that simply affirmed one’s literal equality to the other
would be understood as letting a slight go unpunished. Both of
the rivals, then, must strive to occupy a position of superiority, and
it is this position that is the implicit goal of their actions. The
structure of the relationship desired by each of them is the same;
they merely invert their respective places in the ranking. Thus it is
possible to say that the interactional sequence of rivalry can be analyzed in terms of the rivals’ similar desires, in spite of the very real
differences between their particular actions. What they desire can

153

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

be described in terms of an abstract situation whose essential feature is a particular type of relationship between the two parties in
the dispute. This relationship is “hierarchical” in that it defines a
situation where some significant form of superiority over the other
is enjoyed by one of the parties; the terms and forms of expression
of this superiority may vary greatly, but the essential state of affairs
that is desired remains the same.
This said, we still have not established that Hallgerdr and Bergbora are engaged in double mediation. They may desire the same
~ thing, but are they also each other’s models in these desires? If so,

what tutelary beliefs support the mimetic desiring in question?
And what about the other agents in the feud, the men who do the
fighting? Are they, too, animated by mimetic desire? The story

does not tell us about any previous imitative interaction that
would be relevant to Bergp6ra’s initial insult, but we do know that

this initial action is a spur to Hallgerdr’s response, and from that
moment on, the story is structured in terms of a back-and-forth
dynamic in which each move is strongly conditioned by the other
party's last move. In this sense the feud 1s strongly interactive and
certainly has the kind of cybernetic, runaway quality that Girard
likes to stress in his discussions of double mediation. It does make
some sense to suppose that Bergbora could be serving as the mediator of Hallgerdr’s competitive desire: if Hallgerdr was not suffering from a desire to dominate her hostess prior to the moment
of the first insult, she certainly burns with this and only this desire
a few moments later and will go on burning with it for years. The
source of this desire surely is the challenge that the insult represents to her self-image and to her social standing, so the duration
and personal significance of the desire qualify it as an instance of
personal mediation. Both women will henceforth desire one
thing, victory over the rival, and the knowledge that the rival de-

sires this thing makes the desire all the more intense. The kind of
self-sustaining reciprocal interaction described in chapter 4 is certainly in place here.
But saying that Bergbora is Hallgerdr’s model, and as the feud
progresses, her mediator, does not amount to a full explanation of

why Hallgerdr is driven to insult her hostess, nor does it fully ex-

154 + Models of Desire
plain the complex sequence of events that follows. Why, for example, does Hallgerdr not accept the insult and seek to placate her
hostess? Or again, why does she not consider herself above any
petty rivalry with her hostess? Why does Bergbora prefer risking
her people’s lives to accepting a slight from the other woman?
Here we return to the topic of the tutelary beliefs that establish
Bergbora as a particular type of model for Hallgerdr, and vice
versa. Crucial to this topic is the equality of the two women’s social
ranks, or at the very least, the absence of any stable, socially recognized ranking of their respective statuses. The narrative is clear on
this point: both women are said to possess exceptional beauty, and
although Hallgerdr has a reputation for her violent temper, this
does not exactly mean that she has no status in the “Viking” community of the sagas (many of the men, for example, seem to think

of her as an attractive but dangerous match). In the cultural context of the story, the women’s status is intimately linked to that of
their husbands. Njall and Gunnarr are both influential, powerful,

and attractive men; they are bendr, free and independent landowners living in a society that knows no kingship and no “nobility,” if by this is meant a system of social classification based on
hereditary orders. Yet theirs is at the same time a society where
distinctions of prestige are central to the social fabric. These distinctions are attached to the relative status and glory of both families and individuals, and the typical symbols of this status are
wealth, courage in combat, knowledge of the law, personal influ-

ence and leadership, and an honor that allows no affront without
retribution.
The essential point, then, is that the ranking of the two families
and of its members is both an open and very significant question
for the two women: public recognition of one’s high social status is
believed by them to be an intrinsic end to which many other factors should be subordinated. And this important desire for social
recognition and distinction must express itself in a context where
distinction is never fully certain. Insofar as the one perceives any
sign of real or pretended superiority in the other, this distinction is
not believed to be a necessary or lasting mark of hierarchy, but
temporary and changeable, a strategic contingency that may be re-

155

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

moved with effort and a little luck. Hallgerdr may, when reeling
from the other woman’s last blow, admire her force or cleverness,

but this beliefin the other’s superiority only fuels her desire to win
out in the next round. Thus the mimesis in question is emulative,
not hierarchical, and the mediator is an obstacle, not someone be-

lieved to be out of one’s own range. Although the text does not
offer any evidence on this issue, it seems likely that neither HalIgerdr nor Bergb6ora would acknowledge the other as her mediator
or model: the investment in a self-concept of personal priority is
simply too strong.

The Mimetic Background

Yet this last observation points to another dimension of the mimetic modeling that may be at work in this sort of affair, for the
kind of internal, emulative mediation that I have just discussed still
does not adequately explain the women’s massive investment in
their rivalry with each other. What we have established is that the
two women’s sense of their relative standing is not stabilized by
any socially given hierarchy, and thus their standing is in question.
But why do they each believe it so important not to lose face—so
important indeed as to warrant getting entangled in murderous
intrigues that flatly contradict their husbands’ wishes? Why do
they think that so much is at stake here, and why, once more, does
their rivalry take the particular form of expression that it does,

namely, arranging to have men kill members of the other household? An adequate response to these questions would require a
lengthy examination of the two women’s personal histories, which
is to say, in Girardian terms, the history of their relations to past
models and mediators. And such an analysis in turn requires detailed reference to the norms and beliefs prevalent in the cultural
context in question, beliefs that serve as articles of faith for those
involved in the feud. Here the Girardian analysis of the reciprocal
modeling that begins with the insults would require amplification
by reference to a longer-term developmental scenario, perhaps one
quite similar to a social learning approach, for in both cases it

156 - Models of Desire

would amount to showing how Hallgerdr and Bergbora have
learned from others the attitudes and capacities central to the personal dispositions that make them prone to engage in a protracted
and murderous feud.
The evidence provided by the saga is clearly insufficient to make
such an analysis possible, but the narrator does offer a few telling
clues in relation to Hallgerdr.!8 In the folk wisdom related by the
narrator of the saga, the headstrong woman’s character is traced

back directly to the propensities and deeds of the man who raised
her, a foster father named pjostolfr: “He was strong and skilled in

arms; he had killed many men and paid compensation for none of
them. It was said that he did little to temper Hallgerdr’s character.”!9 In the Old West Norse, the last phrase reads “at hann veri

engi skapboetir Hallgerdi,” which means literally that he was not a
“better-maker” for Hallgerdr, an expression suggestive of an in-

sight into the importance of social influence in that the noun
skapbetir picks out those people whose example improves others’
dispositions. Indeed, Hallgerdr’s foster father does nothing to
make her life more peaceful. He is the man who murders HalIgerdr’s first husband at her request and gets away with it, and who

appears at her second wedding brandishing an axe and looking
hostile. The guests pretend not to notice, probably because to do
so would be to risk one’s life. The same bjéstolfr later murders HalIgerdr’s second husband (against her will this time) and finally gets
killed.
Hallgerdr’s headstrong nature and her concern with social rank
and revenge could plausibly have been conditioned by her growing up under the influence of such models. She says as much herself in an interesting exchange with her real father, who has
wounded her pride by arranging her first marriage behind her back
(which practice was not the least bit uncommon). Her complaint is
twofold: first of all, her father has not cared about her enough to
discuss the matter with her before concluding a deal, and second,
the marriage does not give her as high a rank as her father had
promised. When he responds that he does not prize her arrogance
enough to break a deal that has already been made, she responds
that her attitude should not surprise him, because it is an attitude

157 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge
prevalent in the family. The textual details are interesting here.
Hallgerdr’s phrase begins with the words “Mikill er metnadr
ydvarr frenda” (roughly, “Great is the metnadr of you and your
Kinsmen”), and she goes on to say that it is hardly surprising that
she too should have the same trait in her somewhere.?° The attitude Hallgerdr admits to having, which she attributes to her relatives in the same breath—metnadr—is variously translated as
“ambition,” “pride,”

0

“arrogance,” and so on. More literally, the

word evokes a gnawing or passion for “weighing” or “measuring”
self and other.
~
In the world evoked by the saga, aggressive actions are a common enough way of expressing one’s “ambition” or lust for measuring oneself against others: it suffices to attack and to win, to
defend oneself successfully against those who seek to make one
pay. The social modeling of aggressive behavior finds many examples in the Icelandic family sagas. A particularly extreme example is
Bera’s reaction to her son Egill’s first murder in Egils saga. At age
seven, Egill gets in a scrap with an older playmate during a ball
game, and with the encouragement and help of an older friend,

Egill finishes his young rival off with an axe. A battle ensues, but
Egill’s people overpower their adversaries and Egill comes home
safely. Hearing about her precocious son’s exploit, Egill’s mother
says that he has everything it takes to become a real Viking and
that he should obviously be given a fighting-ship as soon as he 1s
old enough.?!
The foregoing remarks suggest the plausibility of a mimetic
analysis of the motivations that could lead to the sequence of reprisals described in the saga. Both of the rivals have a history of
mediation and modeling inculcating in them those attitudes and
inclinations needed to fuel a protracted and escalating dispute.
Given these beliefs and motivational dispositions, it is possible

that a challenger could become a highly salient model, one whose
actions and attitudes would become the focal point of a significant
period of an individual’s personal history. Indeed, both Hallgerdr
and Bergbora invest heavily in their competitive relation to each
other for eight years or more, and both engage in the extended
plotting and manipulations necessary to get a number of different

158 + Models of Desire

men to take up arms. Their reciprocal mediation leads to a situation where getting the upper hand over the other woman becomes
a central, intrinsically desirable end in life, and various other priorities are subordinated to this project.

Mimesis and Murder

In my analysis of the possible mimetic motivations of the feud, I
have left out a rather crucial consideration, namely, the motives
and beliefs of the men who actually do the killing and dying. Are
they driven by mimetic desires? What of the actions of the two
husbands, who annually bargain over the price to be paid for
murder? Is there anything mimetic about these transactions? I
shall take up these two issues in turn.
It is not an exaggeration to say that the murderers and victims
fall into two categories, the enthusiastic and the unenthusiastic.
The former have an appetite for battle and require little encouragement from the women to go out and attack the designated party.
They do this fully aware that if successful, they will most likely be
the next target. But as argued above, this is a world where there is
honor and prestige to be had through successful combat, a world
where cowardice is to be shunned at any cost. The latter clause is
what preoccupies the men I have labeled unenthusiastic. They
know that they cannot afford not to be guided by the women’s
goading, but at the same time they have little belief that anything
good can come of it. In the feud under discussion, eleven men are

motivated to engage in five violent attacks. Four of these men are
explicitly unenthusiastic about getting involved in the violence but
let themselves be persuaded to do so anyway, most frequently
when a woman raises the question of cowardice. An example is
Kolr, who first responds to Hallgerdr’s request by pointing out
that he will get killed if he murders Svartr; but as soon as she
suggests he may lack courage, he angrily agrees to do her bidding.
Atli is the best example of the opposite: he introduces himself to
Bergb6ra as someone who has caused many wounds and is eager to
attack the man she singles out.

159 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge

In what sense are these two types of motivation mimetic? It is
accurate to say that Atli desires something similar to what Bergbora desires to the extent that both want him to succeed in killing
Kolr, and it is also accurate to say that it is Bergb6ra’s desire that
orients Atli’s action. At the same time, however, to say that they

“desire the same thing” would amount to obscuring important differences. We have already established that what Bergbora really
wants is primacy over her rival and model in this feud, Hallgerdr,
and it is far-fetched to ascribe any such desire to Atli, who seems to
be after a more diffuse form of honor and glory. Perhaps both
~ Bergpora and Atli desire the same thing in that both follow a more
abstract social model that tells them that to struggle to win first
place is a highly desirable course of action. Yet such was Atli’s disposition long before he met the woman. But this point should not
rule out consideration of the more immediate relation between
them: in following the attractive woman’s directives, Atli may also
be motivated by a strong desire for her admiration.
A similar type of motivation is hinted at in the narration of HalIgerdr’s goading of Sigmundr, for the text refers to the great
strength of their sympathy and to the fact that she served him no
less well than she served her husband, which made people talk.
Reference is also made to her influencing him with money. Yet
Hallgerdr takes quite a different approach with pbrainn; she evokes
the fact that he is her son-in-law (by her former marriage) and uses
this familial relation to pressure him into taking up her cause. Fi-

nally, there are the motives of the four sons of Njall, who go out
into the night to encounter Sigmundr and his Swedish friend.
When Bergbora tells them about the insulting poem and goads
them into action, they pretend not to be moved. But in fact they
are furious. Their desire for revenge is not at all a copy of their
mother’s desire to win out over Hallgerdr. The law specifies that
the kinds of insults figuring in the poem constitute a legal warrant
for murder.?? Thus their anger is not a copy of Bergbdéra’s emotions; from their perspective, it is the direct expression of their

own honor as well as of their loyalty to their beloved foster father,
bordr, who was the last victim in the feud, and they have with reluctance been observing their father’s truce with the other side. If

160 - Models of Desire
there is a mimetic element in their motivation, it is not a matter of
their imitating the recent desires of their mother, father, or the
men who killed their foster father. Rather, what they desire is to

preserve their personal honor by repaying those who insulted
them and who killed their close relative. It would be inaccurate to
think that such a desire is taken from the murderers of their foster
father, and thus the rivalry in which they are involved, although it
may partake of the symmetrical and reciprocal features of the feud
as a whole, is not motivated by any reciprocal mediation or mod-

eling. Their motivation, if not their action, is not isomorphic to
the kind of direct cycle of attack and counterattack in which Bergbora and Hallgerdr are engaged. The only way to make that argument would be to suppose that they identify strongly with their
mother’s perspective, but in fact they overtly refuse the idea that it
is her anger that moves them. Consequently, it may be observed
that if they are moved by mimetic desire, it is again of a less proximal variety: they could be said to be acting on beliefs and attitudes
acquired in a long personal history of social learning, a more distal
variety of modeling. In short, the motives of the different men
who do the killing and dying are varied. A central thread in the
motivational processes is a number of generalized beliefs pertaining to personal honor, courage, and retribution, and the different
men act in function of these beliefs—in some cases being pulled
forward by their attractive appeal, in others being pushed along
with reluctance and a kind of grim resolve: one must kill and be
killed in order not to suffer a worse punishment, the public accusation of cowardice hurled by a woman.
What of the role played by the two husbands in the affair? To
what extent are their motivations mimetic? The two men’s actions
throughout the feud are guided by an explicit desire to maintain
their pact of friendship, and this externalized concept of their relationship provides the stable anchor for their various decisions: it is
clear that each believes preserving their alliance to be in his best
interest and actively seeks to attain this goal. Thus each man is willing to sacrifice something desired by everyone—the silver paid in
a ritual of retribution—in order to deal with a situation rendered
unstable by the last act of aggression. Each man is careful to main-

161

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

tain the symmetry in the payments, a symmetry that symbolizes
their parity in each other’s eyes. It could be said that they imitate
each other in this regard, each one’s prudence and caution serving
as a model to the other, but it remains necessary to say how such an
imitation is possible. We can only speculate as to the genesis of this
alliance; the text presents them as great friends from the beginning, and there 1s a kind of symbolic complementarity to the virtues that the narrative has them heroically embody: Gunnarr is the
superlative warrior, while Njall’s wisdom and prophetic capacities
are unmatched. At the same time, the alliance should probably be
~ understood as a highly political one: even a powerful man cannot
stand entirely alone in this society; both men have much to lose by
letting the other become an enemy, and much to gain by maintaining the alliance. As both nourish self-concepts where honor and
probity have an important place, neither wishes to incur the dishonor of breaking their bond, so that the purely pragmatic bases of
the alliance are reinforced by personal self-evaluations. Moreover,
to break this pact is to be in debt, to have to pay retribution in one

form or another. Thus at a point in the action when it is Njall’s
turn to seek retribution, Nyall tells Gunnarr that he does not want
the break in their pact of friendship (vimdtta) to be caused by him
(Njall). He sets a price much lower than what his wife and sons
would agree to, and he makes the agreement in his sons’ absence,

knowing that they would not accept money for the death of their
foster father but will have to abide by this arrangement once it is
made. Similarly, at the next stage in the cycle, Gunnarr forgoes
seeking retribution, in spite of his wife’s frequent goadings. Three
years later, it is Njall who spontaneously offers compensation, a
gesture that strongly stabilizes the situation.
But the text does not present this delicate balance as the product
of some kind of unselfish devotion and affection. Subtle details
suggest that the heads of the two households, in spite of an overriding desire to keep the peace, cannot help but experience a
strong desire for revenge when confronted with the damage just
done by the other side, particularly when the person lost is a relative. Gunnarr thus knows that Njall will be severely tried when he
learns of the murder of his sons’ foster father, and indeed, when

162 + Models of Desire

Njall’s sons finally go out and kill the murderers, Njall spontaneously praises their action. Njall is confronted with contrasting
desires, for his wish to keep the peace with Gunnarr is threatened

by a genuine desire to see his sons avenge the murder. The former
desire is to some extent an imitation of Gunnarr’s motives but also
derives from a strong sense of virtue; the latter desire, far from
being a punctual imitation of his wife’s or his sons’ violent emotions, arises from the background beliefs having to do with propriety and honor: Njall simply cannot let the murder of his sons’
foster father go lightly.

Rivalry and Doubling
Another feature of Girard’s account of the general effects of a cycle
of revenge generated by mimesis should be discussed at this point,
namely, his suggestion that the process turns the adversaries into
“doubles.” Thus Girard contends that mimetic rivalry tends to
eliminate the differences between people’s desires (VS 159/222).
In regard to our example, this is a notion that runs directly against
the grain of most of the commentaries, for a whole tradition surrounds the saga’s depiction of Hallgerdr as an archetypally treacherous and evil female. Hallgerdr, then, must be read as a singular

and striking character, not as an agent whose dispositions are
shaped by her environment and interactions. Boyer points out that
the name of the infamous female is no longer given to Icelandic
girls and labels Hallgerdr “a kind of fury and femme fatale.”23
Heller links the character to a literary and mythical tradition in
which she stands as a quasi-supernatural incarnation of evil and
calamity.** Girard’s stress on symmetry, then, would be contradicted by the narrator’s asymmetrical characterization of the two
women and of their respective allies.2° Lonnroth underscores the
extent to which the narrative is structured in terms of a simple dichotomy between good and evil, a dichotomy that may have had
a very real pragmatic function for both the storyteller and the
audience.?6
In regard to the differences between the parties in the feud, I

163 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge

think it necessary to recognize that the text contains elements of
asymmetry and symmetry in an interesting mixture. The point is
certainly not that one should revive the tradition that tried to
whitewash Hallgerdr.2” Such a rehabilitation attempt is a sterile
and hopeless exercise in regard to a text that literally “fates” HalIgerdr from childhood to behave badly (as a very young girl she
is told that she already has the eyes of a thief, and she indeed goes
on to involve herself in a despicable piece of larceny). Rather, what
is important 1s to show the error of eliminating the important
_ elements of symmetry in the text. If the infamous Hallgerdr is
explicitly labeled as having a bad disposition, her opponent
Bergbora is no princess of grace and humility. The narrator characterizes Njall’s mate as an “excellent woman” but adds that she is
somewhat “harsh-natured” (skaphord, the same term used to describe Hallgerdr).?8 Her subsequent actions reveal her to be stub-

born and vindictive. If Hallgerdr is supposed to be the source of
all evil, the bringer of calamity, why is it that the insult that starts

the feud is made by the “sympathetic” Bergbdéra? Heller, a critic
who is exuberant in blackening Hallgerdr, at least acknowledges

this question but begs it by attributing to Bergbora the very
“knowledge” for which more evidence should be provided. Thus
Heller simply asserts that Bergbora “acts on the knowledge” that
Hallgerdr represents evil and calamity: how could Bergbora be expected to befriend such a character??? In fact, the hypothesis that

the text presents the two women as having radically different
characters prior to the feud should serve to underscore the necessity of recognizing the powerful influence exercised on them by
their rivalry. If in the beginning Bergb6ora does not have HalIgerdr’s essentially evil disposition, if she is only “somewhat” harsh
as opposed to totally hardhearted, is it not interesting that she too
is led to incite men to murder each other over a petty rivalry? If it is
no surprise that the headstrong and evil Hallgerdr goads men to
their deaths and quarrels with her husband whenever he makes
peace, why is it that Bergbora does exactly the same things?
Thus the initial differences between the women are eroded by
the history of the interaction itself, and the “excellent” Bergbora
becomes more and more like her opponent. Herein resides the

164 + Models of Desire

kind of symmetry to which Girard points, a symmetry that is situated at a level deeper than that of moral judgments of individual
characters inasmuch as it concerns the powerful role of intersubjective relations and social influences in determining what the
agents do. In this regard, the rich texture of the actions reported
by the text militates against reducing everything to a single asymmetrical relation between good and evil. This is, I think, the key

insight behind Girard’s talk of “the doubles.” It should also be
pointed out that the feud between the two women does not go far
enough to involve the kind of total social crisis to which Girard
refers when he evokes the radical nondifferentiation of “doubling.” It is already quite significant that the moral differences between Bergbora and Hallgerdr for which some readers argue so
vehemently are already put in question by the similarity of their
competitive desires and actions.

Mimetic Dynamics

Although there is a quasi-cybernetic flavor to the runaway cycle of
rivalry between Hallgerdr and Bergbora, it is only in a very loose
sense that one could speak here of a single mechanism governing
their motives and actions. This is the case because the pattern of
double mediation is not manifested in a pure and autonomous
form but is immersed in a complex texture of other factors, such as
the other kinds of social and psychological determinations introduced above, of which some are a matter of the past history of
personal and intersubjective mimesis, while others can hardly be
explained in terms of a mimetic psychology. Thus it would appear
that even in regard to a highly stylized and schematic textual example, feuding is not reducible to the single dynamic of reciprocal
interaction described in terms of double mediation. This is not to
say that such a dynamic is not at the heart of the example; on the
contrary: Bergpora’s and Hallgerdr’s emotions take the form of a
highly mimetic runaway cycle of hatred and aggression. Yet this
motivational dynamic does not function autonomously. The cycle
of violent actions finds some of the conditions necessary to its

165

- Desire, Violence, and Revenge

functioning in another form of mimesis, the more distal and more
longstanding type of mediation that we may associate with developmental processes and social learning. The latter point should be
underscored: Bergbdra and Hallgerdr can only fascinate each
other reciprocally in a runaway process because of the kind of people they are when their rivalry begins, and many complex factors,
including histories of social modeling, are responsible for their dispositions and actions. Similarly, the other actors in the drama are
not motivated solely by the direct, mimetic influence of the two
. women, or even by the actions and desires of their opponents; although these factors are in some instances important, personal histories and socially instituted practices and beliefs are always crucial
in motivating the men to fight or keep the peace.
Mention must also be made of the role of contingent factors in
the sequence of events recounted by the saga. The saga presents a
highly symmetrical and stylized sequence of actions, one already
purged of the messiness and detail that is encountered in actual
human affairs. It should be noted, for example, that the storyteller

decides the outcome of each combat in the manner that makes possible the most efficient presentation of a cycle of feuding: those
who attack, seeking violent retribution, always win. This is in a
sense a wholly trivial detail because it in no way diminishes the
interest of the narrative, which is simply more streamlined as a result of this convenience. But another way in which the narrative
fuels the cycle of violence is of independent interest. At a key point
in the sequence, the point at which Njall has accepted two hundred
silvers for b6rdr’s murder and has enjoined his sons not to avenge
him, it is a group of outsiders, and not the members of the feud-

ing groups, who play a crucial role in advancing the conflict. By
chance, some nomadic beggar women happen to visit Hallgerdr,

and it is their provocative talk that leads to the composition and
communication of the insulting poem. This event occurs at a moment when the feud seems to have calmed down, and it leads to a

dramatic escalation of the action.
How is the action of these beggars to be related to the dynamics
of mimetic interaction at work in the feud? One can only speculate
about the motives of these devious beggars (who may appear to

166 + Models ofDesire
some critics as a mere prop used to advance the narrative), but it

should be clear that they cannot plausibly be said to be driven by
the same desires as the parties who are more immediately involved
in the conflict: the beggars do not share Hallgerdr’s hatred of
Bergbora, nor are they moved by Bergbora’s desire for revenge
against Hallgerdr. Perhaps as beggars they thrive by telling their
hostesses (and benefactors?) what they think they want to hear and
thus strategically model their statements on what they know, from
hearsay, about the desires of Hallgerdr and Bergbora. But in any
case it is not the system of mimetic desire defining the interactions
of Hallgerdr and Bergbora that causes the beggars to appear when
they do, and thus we may conclude that the system of mimetic
rivalry in question here does not function in perfect autonomy.
The element of contingency that the arrival and actions of the beggars introduces into the sequence of events of the story contradicts
the idea that the particular course of action is wholly determined
by any single psychological or interactional mechanism or set of
laws: the dynamics of interpersonal mimesis are “open” to the play
of circumstance, and it is only by looking at the interaction of the
two that we can understand what happens.%°
In conclusion, then, we emphasize the fact that the functioning
of reciprocal imitation, its effective generation of a bloody feud, is
only possible given any number of complex conditions. In pointing to these conditions, we trace the limits of a psychological and
dispositional explanation of actions and interactions and emphasize the need to take into account various immediate and more distant physical and social circumstances. These circumstances must
figure in any explanation of the transition from one social situation
to the next. We may contrast different kinds of conditions and factors that conspire to reinforce the dynamic of feuding. Some of the
conditions are part of a psychology of mimesis; others, such as
contingent intersections of human actions, are not. Among the
mimetic factors, one may distinguish between proximal and distal
types of mimetic factors, the former having to do with the immediate genesis of the agents’ motivational states, the latter with the
prior circumstances and events that have helped to create a situ-

167 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge

ation in which a Hallgerdr and a Bergbdra may become each
other’s mediators in a lengthy and highly destructive feud.
Among these background conditions, one may point, first of
all, to a particular form of socialization of the actors involved, for

only reference to such a socialization can explain the genesis of the
determinant mimetic dispositions. In regard to the example under
discussion, what is at stake is a frequent modeling and glorification
of aggressive and competitive action as well as a fixation of beliefs
hinging on the importance of personal ambition and distinction.
_ Second, it is necessary to evoke, along with Girard, the crucial role
of certain institutional facts, in particular the absence of any central executive authority capable of deterring violence or at least of
preventing its perpetuation between neighbors. Quite obviously,
the existence of a particular institution of kinship is also determinant in making the feud possible. In relation to the example, one
may point specifically to the role of fosterage, an institution by
means of which familial bonds were artificially extended so as to
reinforce the potential power of a given group.
Finally, it may be noted that the agents’ beliefs about their own
social context 1s another crucial element in the drama, and the rela-

tions between these beliefs and interpersonal dynamics are highly
complex. While being driven by their mimetic fascination with
each other, both Bergbdéra and Hallgerdr employ strategies that
imply an awareness of the social landscape within which their respective strategies are situated. The assumptions about social relations at stake here are complicated. For example, when Bergbora
gets pordr, the foster father of Njall’s sons, to kill Brynjolfr, she
engages in a strategy that promises to aggravate the conflict considerably. She knows that her husband has received one hundred
silvers for the death of Atli, a free man who was not their relative;

she knows that up to this point in the affair, the two husbands have
kept their relations stable by maintaining a careful balance of accounts: after Gunnarr asks for twelve silver coins, Njall in turn asks
for only twelve. Should pordr be killed in turn, Njall and his sons

would be required to seek an even greater retribution, which
would greatly unsettle the precarious balance between the two

168 + Models of Desire

groups. When Hallgerdr gets one of her husband’s relatives to kill
pordr, her strategy is similar in that it too is a matter of exploiting
her knowledge of the familial bonds and obligations in an effort to
accelerate the conflict. Knowledge of the obligations involved in
the kinship relations is thus an essential part of the women’s strategies. But this knowledge and these strategies are not copied as
part of an immediate mimetic reciprocity; hence they must be explained in terms of a more distal and more longstanding form of
social learning, as well as in terms of an immediate engagement in
forms of strategic calculation that are not immediately determined
by states of desire.
An awareness of the infernal logic of the social drama being
played out by their wives and associates also plays a crucial role in
the actions of Njall and Gunnarr. If there is a great deal of supernaturalism in Njall’s prophetic foretelling of future events, there is
at the same time an important element of sociological insight:
given a knowledge of certain relations, motivations, and prior ac-

tions of others, it 1s sometimes possible to predict quite accurately
what their next move has to be. Thus the supernatural themes of
fatality and destiny find an echo 1n a purely social and much more
plausible kind of foresight, one having its basis in the fact that a
person’s range of possible actions can be horribly narrow at a certain stage in a social situation. At the same time, however, the
story suggests that a knowledge of social interaction can sometimes help the actors to avoid disaster.
Thus there intervenes in the system of feuding, with its mimetic
and other motivations, a different and to some extent counteract-

ing element, namely, a knowledge of the dynamics of the feud itself. This knowledge is by no means total, nor does it govern or
control the action, replacing a mythical realm of total mimetic
puppetry with an equally mythical realm of absolute autonomy
and freedom. Nevertheless, Gunnarr and Njall’s temporary forestalling of the conflict is an excellent example of how such a knowledge can under some conditions manage to vitiate a mimetic system of rivalry and violence, replacing it with a self-governance
serving to maintain the peace: Gunnarr refuses to seek compensation, thereby temporarily putting a halt to the cycle, and Njall

169 - Desire, Violence, and Revenge

takes it upon himself to offer compensation so as to reestablish
parity with his friend. Here we have a cooperative form of mimesis
that is not based on any form of delusion or violence. In such moments, which are far too rare in the world of the sagas, the agents
act on their knowledge of the ultimate consequences of being
driven by an emulative mimesis. This is a knowledge exemplified
by the folk wisdom repeated by Rannveig, Gunnarr’s mother, in a
prophetic phrase with which it may be appropriate to conclude
the present chapter: “It is said that the hand is soon sorry that it
Sstruck.”3}

Conclusion

In this book I have not reported on the results of any systematic
empirical studies, and I am consequently not in a position to make
any scientific claims about the frequency or significance of mimetic
desire in people’s lives. Nor can I present any evidence concerning
the role such a phenomenon may have played in directing the
course of human history. Instead, the results of this study are interpretive and conceptual. In a sense I have asked the reader to engage
in a game of make-believe in which we try to imagine, with some

detail and rigor, what the world would have to be like if we were to
generalize and to extend René Girard’s readings of literary and
cultural documents. Thus I have asked how some of his claims
about mimetic desire could be reconciled with the way we use “desire” and related terms in our everyday understandings of ourselves and others, relying on my own intuitions and on those of
some philosophers and psychologists who have written on the
topic. One of my conclusions is that the idea of “desire according
to the other” is not as simple and univocal as it may seem, but I also
conclude that once it has been unpacked a bit, the notion identifies
some types ofsituations that seem plausible and important.
The idea of mimetic desire has a basic, intuitive appeal. It seems
right to conjecture that when the appetites have been sated, people
often do not know what they want. Yet this uncertainty may be
coupled with the perception that the actions of others are guided
by unswerving and confident attitudes. Some of these persons
stand out as salient models to be followed, and when the right attitudes about such a model are in place, a mimetic adoption of that
model’s desires can follow. Today’s noisy public discourses of stardom, personality, and persuasion are designed to give rise to this
sort of modeling. Persons designated as our superiors invite us to
170

171 + Models of Desire

desire what they desire, even when their prestige and pleasures are
nonexistent or well out of our reach. Yet an impersonal and transient form of modeling is probably not the most significant and
effective variety of mimetic desire. Parents, friends, lovers, and

educators serve as long-term personal mediators whose desires,
real or imagined, inspire longings patterned after them. It is hard
to imagine a personal history devoid of such relationships, and
Girard has ably demonstrated that many of our best narratives
and dramas systematically evoke them. Girard also claims that the
~“great texts” trace some of the typical patterns that emerge when
these mimetic relations go wrong. Threatened by the successes of
the disciple, the mediator withholds encouragement and begins to
compete, vitiating cooperation and learning. In a world that prizes
individual talent and success, strategies that disguise imitation and
cooperation unfold and are encouraged, but often at the cost of
delusion and deceit. A runaway system of competition metes out
its bitter rewards of failure and envy.
The mimetic hypothesis has an intuitive appeal. But is it also
plausible to speculate that our disposition to desire “according to
others” has a hidden and systematic orientation, a latent structure
or dynamic, a “logic” that would warrant a rigorous use of the
term “mechanism”? Can a mechanism of mimesis be used to explain the genesis of patterns of culture and its institutions? Perhaps it can, and I do not claim to have established the contrary. I
am not persuaded by sweeping neo-Kantian arguments in favor of
a purely idiographic approach in psychology and anthropology.
But when it is a matter ofa claim that some particular mechanism
generates and explains some complex phenomenon, the burden of
proof lies on the shoulders of those who make this claim. They
should show us a blueprint of the mechanism and describe how a
working model of it can be constructed. In my view, the very best
descriptions of mimetic desire that we have do not specify anything like a mechanism, if by this is meant a finite and closed system of factors that function together to produce certain types of
effects. “Subject, mediator, and the spectacle of the mediator’s de-

sire yield mimetic desire” does not define a mechanism in this
sense. I have tried to show that this basic mimetic formula plausi-

172 « Conclusion

bly yields at least two very different kinds of motivational states
and that “mimetic desire” therefore divides into two significantly
different kinds, the imitative and the emulative. The attitudes that

characterize these two sorts of mimetic episodes display only a
highly schematic similarity, and I have not been able to describe
any laws or patterns governing transitions between them. Under
what general conditions does a tutelary belief in the hierarchical
distance and superiority of a mediator transform itself into an envious vision of the other’s temporary advantage? This is an outstanding problem within the mimetic hypothesis.
Other outstanding problems have to do with the hypothesis
that mimetic mechanisms explain certain social dynamics. Even if
we were to suppose that a mimetic machine functioned to produce
a single type of motivational state in agents, we would still need to
refer to a host of other factors to determine whether— and how—
these agents might then act on those states. Given the agent’s other
attitudes, the mimetic desire need not turn out to be the preponderant motivational state, and even should it do so, it could moti-

vate a number of significantly different types of behavior. Suppose
I am overwhelmed by a mimetic desire to win the prize that I think
my obstacle-model covets. I may believe there is nothing I can do
to enhance my chances of winning the prize, or I may choose one
among several schemes that emerge from the tangled network of
my background beliefs about the ways and means of the world.
But which of the many possible options will emerge? Applying a
very broad rationality heuristic, we can anticipate that in such a
situation an agent always chooses a course of action that is subjectively appropriate. In other words, the agent will select means that
he or she believes may bring about the desired end.! But even if
this clause is granted, we still do not have an effective functional
specification of the type of behavior that is to ensue.
To evoke a literary example, the reader (or listener) who is
about halfway into Njal’s Saga should have a pretty good idea that
Hallgerdr is driven by a terrible form of envy and that she is willing to inflict any sort of harm she can on her enemies. A more
reflective reader may even have a keen sense of her tactics and may
have observed that she always tries to find a way to get her hus-

173 - Models of Desire

band to have to seek retribution from someone related to her
rivals. But it still comes as a surprise when we learn of her attempt
to create trouble by having a slave steal some food, even if we take
the line about her “thief’s” seriously. The theft seems ineffectual
and lowly, and it is unclear how she can believe that it will advance
her cause. But this unanticipated machination begins to make
more sense when we learn that by openly displaying the stolen
goods and making the theft known, Hallgerdr can get her husband further embroiled in the feud. Retrospectively, the action fits
-well within a plan that flows coherently from her motives, but in a
devious and sordid way. The action makes sense, then, but we do

not have a theoretical mechanism that generates or determines the
link between her desire and the scheme that is devised to satisfy it.
More generally, when I try to make sense of the sequence of actions that figure within the cycle of violent retributions, I must
include such a diversity of factors that it is hard to believe that the
mimetic motivations specify the “system” of those interactions as a
whole. My conclusion is that the mimetic concepts describe a pattern of pertinent and typical motivational factors that may play a
role in such affairs but that they should not be mistaken for an
explanatory device that literally generates a functional description
of the types of actions and interactions that make up the cycle of
revenge.
Girard once responded to this sort of objection by saying that
he only uses the term “mechanism” to mean that many crucial aspects of the mimetic process unfold in the absence of “conscious
choice.” But reframing the issue in this manner cannot help in the
absence of a solution to the enormous problem of saying what
consciousness is and does. The psychology of attitudes discussed
in this book, the psychology with which Girard and the rest of us
implicitly and explicitly operate in making sense of ourselves and
others, does not stand or fall with a solution to the problem of
consciousness. We assume instead that conscious introspection 1s
fallible and that beliefs and desires can be functionally modeled as
dispositions, and not only as sensations or states of awareness. For
example, in everyday usage, the belief ascription “the reader believes his or her eyes are focused on the book right now” does not

174 + Conclusion

entail the ascription “the reader presently has a conscious, focal
belief that his or her eyes are focused on the book.” To say that the
mimetic selection of a model or a scapegoat is often— perhaps
most often—not the product of a reflective decision does not support the conclusion that perceptions, beliefs, and motives having
semantic content do not contribute to its orientation. Once we observe that the selection of victims converges on individuals who
bear typical signs of difference—the “stereotypes of persecution”
that Girard so brilliantly describes—we are no longer dealing
with a “blind” or “purely arbitrary” process. That process not only
is unjust but is based on a cognitive error about the causal powers
and responsibilities of the victims, who are wrongly identified as
the source of a vast social crisis that they could not possibly have
brought about. To situate that error beneath the level of “consciousness” or “self-reflection” is one step; to deny the role of meaningful
attitudes in a mimetic process is another. Both are steps into the
dark, the former because we have no real understanding of consciousness, the latter because it cancels the descriptive and explanatory program of a psychology of meaningful attitudes, situating
“the action” at a level of description that has never been specified.
Taking that second step would deprive us of our means of critiquing and trying to forestall the kind of sacrificial error that the theory identifies.
It is my conviction that the Girardian critique of scapegoating
works very well. It identifies with an unprecedented degree of precision some patterns of interaction and attitudes that appear across
a wide range of contexts and domains. The bread and butter of the
movie industry is a ritualistic fictional evocation of the resolution
of a violent crisis by means of the heroic extermination of a monstrous scapegoat. Similar fantasies also provide the scenarios for
some of our most earnest political dramas. Girard is right to point
out that many aspects of our social order of norms and cooperation
are achieved and maintained through a basic pattern of exclusion.
Yet I have on several occasions stated my reservations about some
of the second-order claims that Girard makes for the explanatory
scope of these descriptions. What was said about the putative
autonomous causal mechanisms of mimetic desire holds equally

175 + Models of Desire

well for the notion that a single “scapegoat mechanism” could
serve as the motor of societal dynamics. Even less am I persuaded
by Girard’s claim that this cultural pattern was generated by a
mechanism of nonrepresentational mimicry. I find the kinds of scenarios explored in chapter 4 ambitious and interesting, but only
the most reckless gambler would wager that any one of them is the
right story about the emergence of human culture. In regard to
some topics, one has no choice but to place one’s bets on some
risky belief, but surely the origin of human culture is not one of
_ them.
One last word about René Girard’s achievement. He often castigates our academic “literary culture” for its intellectual nihilism
and sterility. No doubt he exaggerates, but in my view his criticisms do single out some prevalent (but by no means omnipresent) aspects of contemporary literary scholarship. Girard complains that critics often fail to demonstrate, when they do not flatly
betray, the cognitive value of literature and of literary research.
His own work, he adds, has convinced him that “the most per-

spicacious texts from the standpoint of human relationships are
the great texts of Western literature.” Instead of just applying
ready-made theories such as psychoanalysis to literary works,
critics should try to articulate the valuable insights that the works
themselves have to offer. I totally agree, and it seems to me that
Girard deserves to be recognized as one of a tiny minority ofcritics
who have achieved this goal. If we are to follow the example he has
set, our task is not to apply the mimetic hypotheses but to see how
creative readings of literary and other texts can help us to make
them stronger.

Sarah

ae
‘ Me an

i secyn
anae
8 —
sad : Nad
aaeget sebe
an

en

—? Pacey = pal
_

irre

4A

Sa

pier RA

PA,

PU

Nore ay ae

Me,

en meay Yell Ae aie

ee

Se Lee hee) Aw rex ad
‘he plete
r>
Deg
a Fis3 2h

HPT: de, : —e

ra

eSm
oxy a! Chas wats, Ue
ee 9 op: ales =ie

ue
a

4) Be Ae

> «ha

—~

i ~—Mii-eAytiztons

| asl

TREE

Pe

¥
j

ee

"1a

pe

eee
@@

Ae

ras
748,

meLae
Ps

7

ema
pid ¥

ae

es

-

Qi!

Deiat eg ha Li

(os

e he

ol
ee

2
reverend

rene

'

Abe
tes

ae

aaah

hove.: &
i

>

Notes

INTRODUCTION

1. Fora sampling, see Dumouchel 1988; for bibliographies of Girard’s
- work and of the secondary literature, see Juilland 1986, as well as Deguy
and Dupuy 1982.
2. A highly creative development of the latter is proposed by Gans
(1981, 1985). See also the contributions in Hamerton-Kelly 1987.
3. Gans 1977.
4. See, e.g., the excellent work by Schwager (1978), as well as the es-

says in McKenna 1985.
5. Aglietta and Orléan 1982; Dumouchel and Dupuy 1979; Orléan
1985, 1986a, 1986b, 1989.
6. Dupuy 1982, 125. The explanatory priority of the theory of mimesis in Girard’s anthropology was earlier stressed by Gans (1977).
7. Various authors have described this methodological constraint on
the role of models and general intuitions in psychology in terms of the
need to construct an “effective procedure” for any given theory of psychological processes (see, e.g., Johnson-Laird 1983, 6—8). More recently,

Baker puts the point as follows: “An effective procedure 1s one that can be
completed by mechanical application of instructions (generated, for example, by a series of yes/no questions) in a finite number of steps” (1987,
45 n. 10).
8. E.g., the sense specified in Merton 1949, 90.
9. Allport 1969, 28.
10. For an extensive bibliography of work in this tradition, see Miller
and Dollard 1941, app. 2. See also Aronfreed 1969.
11. Allport 1969; Bandura 1986; Bandura and Walters 1963; Flanders

1968; Gewirtz and Stingle 1968.
12. E.g., Bloom, Hood, and Lightbown 1974; Speidel and Nelson
1989; Whitehurts and Vasta 1975.

13. E.g., Grusec and Brinker 1972; Perry and Bussey 1979.
14. Two important early discussions ofthe topic in this century were
Guillaume 1926 and Piaget 1968. A few examples of the vast amount of
iby7

178 - Notes to Pages xvi-3
more recent work are Abravanel, Levan-Goldschmidt, and Stevenson
1976; Abravanel and Sigafoos 1984; Fouts, Waldner, and Watson 1976;
Garcia, Baer, and Firestone 1971; Grusec and Abramovitch 1982;

Meltzoff 1988; Poulson and Kymissis 1988; Schunk 1987; and Wyrwicka
1988.
15. E.g., Bandura 1973; Geen 1978; Geen, Beatty, and Arkin 1984;

Huesmann 1988.
16. Berman 1988; Gould and Shaffer 1986; Phillips 1974; Schmidtke
and Hafner 1988.
17. Bussey and Perry 1977; Kuhn 1973; Oliver and Hoppe 1974;
Rosenbaum, Horne, and Chalmers 1962; Rosenbaum and Tucker 1962.
18. Bandura 1971, 1986; Bavelas et al. 1988; Thelen, Frautschi, et al.
1978; Thelen and Kirkland 1976; Thelen et al. 1980.

19. For a somewhat more detailed statement about the place of literary
analysis in Girard’s research program, see Livingston 1986.
20. In the sense developed in Danto 1985.
21. For more detail, see Livingston 1988a.
22. Girard writes: “The scientific spirit, like the spirit of economic enterprise, is a by-product of the deep subterranean influence that has been
exercised by the evangelical text” (1982, 285, my translation; cf. Livingston 1986, 204—5). For my response, see chapter 4.

CHAPTER

ONE

APPROACHES

TO MIMETIC

DESIRE

1. Girard 1961, 17; 1965, 4—5. Henceforth I shall give page numbers

to Girard’s major works, using the following abbreviations: Deceit, Desire,
and the Novel |Mensonge romantique et vérité romanesque = DDN; Violence
and the Sacred | La Violence et le sacré = VS; Things Hidden since the Foundation of the World | Des choses cachées depuis la fondation du monde = TH;
“To Double Business Bound” = DBB; the important 1978 interview in Diacritus = I; Le Bouc émissatre / The Scapegoat = BE; and.A Theater ofEnvy =
TE. Where applicable, I give page numbers to the published English
translations first, followed by references to the original French. In the case
of Mensonge romantique and Des choses cachées, | give page numbers in the
“Livre de poche” editions.
2. See, e.g., Bassoff 1986.

3. I am drawing here on distinctions stressed by Bandura in his
“multiprocess” analysis of observational learning and modeling (1986,
91).
4. Oughourlian 1982, 34.

179 - Notes to Pages 4—15
5. Baudelaire 1961, 1295; cf. his “L’>homme est un animal adorateur”

(1286).
6. This theme is mentioned by Webb (1988, 185), who comments that
the real object of the desire for the other’s being is power. An emphasis on
difference and divinity is my guiding
— and undefended— assumption in
Livingston 1982.
7. Orléan 1985, 1986a, 1986b, 1989.
8. Borch-Jacobsen 1982, 115; trans. 1988, 90.

_

9. Girard 1978a, 139.
10. Girard 1978e, 300.
1. “Pour moi, il n’y a jamais qu'une seule et méme structure en devenir perpétuel” (Des choses cachées, 484; 370 in the Ist ed.). Girard deleted

this phrase from the English translation, p. 348.
12. Dupuy 1982, 128.
13. Some of Girard’s sharpest polemical barbs— and these can be very
sharp—are directed against psychoanalysis. For a sample, see TE 44, 64,
74, 287-89, 296, 312. Some valuable comments on Girard and Freud are

presented in Johnsen 1989, 120-24.
14. See Davidson 1980. For commentaries, see LePore and McClaughlin 1985; Livingston n.d., b; and Vermazen and Hintikka 1985.
15. See, e.g., Churchland 1981, and for a critique, Baker 1987.
16. Elster 1986a, 28.

17. Davidson’s initial proposal was that a belief and a desire together
make up the “primary reason” that explains an action, but this proposal
has been criticized and revised in a number of ways. One important theme
has emphasized the necessity of including various concepts of “intention”
in our understanding of how action explanations work, a typical claim
being that belief and desire alone do not suffice to capture the nuances of
our attributional psychology (see, e.g., Mele 1988, 1992). Attention has

been drawn to the dynamic temporal relations between an agent’s attitudes, intentions, and projects (see Bratman 1987, 1988, as well as Audi
199], Farrell 1989, and McCann 1991). Parallel to this renewed interest in

concepts of intention, there have been some recent reworkings of concepts of “willing” and “volition” (see Ginet 1990). At the same time, theorists argue over the causal status of intentional action explanations, some

denying that Davidson’s initial formulation of a causal approach can withstand the objections that have been raised against it, others proposing
ways of defending that basic approach (for the former, see Wilson 1989;
for examples of the latter, see Bishop 1989, Dretske 1988, Heil and Mele
1991, and Jackson and Pettit 1990). For additional background in action

180 - Notes to Pages 15-21
theory, see Brand 1984; Davidson 1980, 1987; Goldman 1970; Mele
1992; Thalberg 1977; and Velleman 1989.
18. See Lewis 1988; Marks 1986; Mele 1990b; Mendola 1990; Nagel
1979; Pettit 1987; Pettit and Price 1989; Platts 1986; Smith 1987; Stampe
1987; Wallace 1990; and Wilkerson 1986.

19. Locke 1982, 249. Another understanding of cognitivism Is articulated by Pettit and Smith (1990), who distinguish between different
cognitivist claims: (a) that desire is not needed for someone to act on a
reason; and (0) that the necessary desire can have a cognitive origin and/or
nature (see pp. 573—74). In my view, allowing that desire is necessary,
while stipulating that desire can derive from belief, is a kind of moderate
conativism.
20. For an example of this sort of strategy, see Brand 1984, 135-40,

where the conclusion is that “non-comparative preferring” must be taken
as a “primitive” term in the theory.
21. Quine 1960, 222-26.
22. This point is usefully developed by Alston (1967, 404), and by
Brandt and Kim (1963). Dretske (1988) articulates an analysis of desire as
receptivity within the context of the organisms learning history (see Brat-

man 1990; and Mele 1991).
23. Anscombe 1958, 68.

24. Audi 1973, 4-5.
25. Stalnaker 1987, 15.
26. Smith 1987.
27. For a critique of a phenomenological conception of desire, see
Smith 1987. Pettit and Smith (1990) usefully distinguish between “foreground” and “background” conceptions of the role of desire in the explanation of action, and I find their arguments in favor of the latter per-

suasive.
28. Wilson (1989) argues that a crucial aspect of action explanations,
if not the crucial aspect, is what he calls the “act-relation” operator of “intention in action” (not to be confused with John Searle’s [1983] use of the
term, which is part of precisely the sort of causal analysis that Wilson is
out to challenge). Wilson’s act-relational operator is presented as a specification of the logical form of our talk about the “in order to” of purposive
action. The canonical statement of intention in action, Wilson writes,

runs as follows: Ag intends of e that it o. In Wilson’s view, the content of
the intention specified in this formula refers directly to the action, e, that

the intention is about. It does not refer to that particular action via a
description of it, but refers demonstratively. It is by virtue of this direct

181 - Notes to Pages 21-29
reference to the particular act being performed that the intention is about,
and thus explanatory of, that particular action. For Wilson, the actrelative intention in action is fundamental to intentionalist action explanation and is irreducible to causal analysis in terms of antecedent beliefs
and desires. For a rejoinder, see Mele 1992, chap. 12.
29. Wilson 1989, 192.
30. For this notion, see Pears 1984, as well as Elster 1983, and Mele

1987a.
31. See Baier 1986; and Davis 1986. Baier offers valuable historical

remarks and argues against using the term “desire” for all forms of mo- tivating passions. She contends that desire implies “impatient discontent.” Davis proposes a distinction between “volitive” and “appetitive”
senses of desire, the former embracing such notions as wanting and wishing, the latter covering urges, longings, and cravings.
32. Marks 1986, 2—3, refers to desire as a “generic conative term.”
33. See, e.g., Kojéve 1947. It should be stressed that “desire” in this

general sense 1s a term of art. As Wilson points out, there is no one English
noun such that “The agent wanted to X” can be reliably paraphrased as
“The agent had an N to X” (1989, 184 n. 14).
34. On this sort of conflict, see Watson 1975; Frankfurt 1988; and
Mele 1987a, 1992, n.d. On relations between intention and motivation,

see Mele 1990a.
35. “Le désir, en somme, est le premier a acquérir 4 son propre sujet un
savoir qu'il juge intolérable” (Des choses cachées, 427; st ed., 327). The
English translation (revised by Girard) reads: “In short, desire relieves its

subject ofan intolerable knowledge” (TH 303).
36. For a discussion of the parameters of constructive and pointless
debates over the “psychology of the subject,” see Livingston 1991b. For
philosophical concepts of personal identity, see Parfit 1986 and Perry
1975. Two recent studies on the Kantian background are Allison 1990
and Powell 1990.
37. For similar discussions, see Brand 1984 and Cummins 1983, 77—

82; what I refer to as occurrent beliefs are the explicit beliefs that Cummins makes the object of the UNDERSTANDER.
38. Fora range of views on the divisive question of the role of notions
of “consciousness” and “accessibility to consciousness” in psychological
explanations, see Searle 1990, and especially the peer review that accompanies his article.
39. One such argument that I shall not explore in detail here contends
that this sort of psychology is what children employ in learning to under-

182 - Notes to Pages 29-48
stand themselves and others. A growing literature focuses on the issue of
the child’s “theory” of the mind; for a sampling, see Astington, Harris,

and Olson 1988.

CHAPTER

TWO

ELEMENTS

OF MIMETIC

DESIRE

. Stendhal 1952, 1:487.

. Orléan 1985, 1986a, 1986b, 1989.
. E.g., Ross and Fletcher 1985.
. See Bandura 1971, 1973, 1977, 1986, and 1989.
Stendhal 1952, 1:475.
nN.
PP
WHY
6. Such an explanatory deflation is typically the artifact of unrealistic
models of scientific explanation. Sources on explanation that I have found
helpful include Achinstein 1983 and Miller 1987.
7. Here and in what follows I am selectively adopting the terminology
of Barwise and Perry (1983, 1985). Roughly speaking, these authors use
the term “situation” to pick out a collection of particulars, relations (and
types thereof) in a single space-time location, while a “course of events”
refers to a similar collection defined across more than one location.
“Types” of situations or courses of events are ones having at least one variable in them (instead of only particulars), and “abstract” types of situations or courses of events are ones that do not correspond to, or classify,
real world situations (although they may be the object of an intentional
attitude). In order to avoid using too much jargon, I shall speak of “situations” only, including under that term what Barwise and Perry have referred to as “courses of events.” In the present context I do not require the
strong claim that these concepts, and the associated notation, can ade-

quately characterize all possible contents of desire; indeed, if the contents
of desire included all possible events (including, for example, unlocated
exemplifications of a property), such a claim would be indefensible. On
the metaphysics of events, see Bennett 1988 and Cleland 1991. On the
more general question of the individuation of semantic contents, see, for a

start, Richard 1990. I cannot enter here into the burgeoning “broad
versus narrow content” debate; see, e.g., Heil and Mele 1991, Jackson and
Pettit 1990, and Patterson 1990.

8. Stendhal 1952, 1:267.
9. Dretske 1988, p. 127.

10. Ibid., 130.
ll. Ibid.

183 - Notes to Pages 51—02
12. Girard frequently speaks of such an “identity,” a relatively recent
example being the following passage: “The second desire duplicates the
first and can only result from an imitation of it, a kind of copy. This is what
I call imitative, or mimetic or mediated desire” (1985b, 198).
13. Readers familiar with the puzzles of contemporary philosophical
semantics will be able to think of additional complexities. For example,
one may entertain the permutations that would be introduced with de re
and directly referential desires.
14. I have heard the argument that “X desires to help Y keep his seat”
cannot be the object of an instance of mimetic desire because X’s and Y’s

~ desires are not the “same kind.” Such an argument could only succeed if
we were equipped with a relevant taxonomy of kinds of desire, which we
are not. The argument also would have the consequence of excluding all
cases of external mediation from the category of mimetic desire. There is
no law against such a stipulation, but it should be kept in mind that such a
move still does not answer the question why agents have acquisitive desires and why they sometimes imitate others’ desires in an acquisitive and
rivalrous fashion.
15. Personal communication 1987.
CHAPTER

THREE

PATTERNS

OF MIMETIC

INTERACTION

1. A similar point has been expressed as follows by Perry and Bussey
in a survey of social psychological studies on imitation in children: “Much
of the early work on children’s imitation focused on factors that cause
children to adopt specific actions they have seen displayed by a model.
What makes a girl scold or nurture her doll in ways that resemble how her
mother has treated her? Why does a boy imitate aggressive acts he has seen
in a television cartoon? But focusing on children’s imitation of specific
acts was soon recognized to be an insufficient approach to the study of
modeling influences. Children learn far more than specific actions
through modeling” (1984, 111).
2. For background, see Nelson and Hayes 1986; Ozer 1986; and Per-

vin and Lewis 1978.
3. Mischel 1968.
4. Lewin 1935.
5. Girard’s stress on “patterns of interaction” and on systematic relations reveals a strong affinity to Bateson (1972), a common source being
cybernetics and systems theory.

184 - Notes to Pages 04-101
6. Bandura 1986, 48.

7. For interesting distinctions between types and modes of knowledge of self, see Neisser 1988.

8. For background, see Perry 1975.
9. Tugendhat 1986.
10. Boér and Lycan 1986.
ll. See, e.g., Deci 1975, 1980; and Deci and Ryan 1985.
12. For a detailed development along these lines, see Tuomela 1984,

chap. 9.
13. Weber 1968, 1:24.
14. This reading has been contested, but its accuracy in relation to the
novel’s complexities is not my present concern.
15. This type of sociocultural context is ably explored by the Brazilian
anthropologist Robert da Matta (1987). Goldmann (1961) also proposes
a sociological framework for the theory of mimetic desire, but I doubt
that his distinction between use value and exchange value really suffices. A
more likely source is Dumont (1966, 1977, 1983). See also Girard’s so-

ciological remarks in chap. 5 of DDN, where he evokes Tocqueville.
16. Bandura 1973, 46; see also Bandura 1983 and 1986.

17. In the published English translation, which was modified by Girard, the quoted phrase is toned down: “Here we encounter a true ‘uncon-

scious’.”
18. Readers who have reservations about the standard account of
knowledge or its application to the case of intersubjective knowledge are
invited to replace “true and justified belief” with the most optimistic and
well-founded epistemic notion they are willing to allow in such instances.
19. Proust 1954, 1:84.
20. For useful background to these questions, see Dupuy 1986.
21. Proust 1954, 1:292.

22. Ibid., 3:905.
23. Demos 1960, 588.
24. See Elster 1986b; McLaughlin and Oksenberg Rorty 1988; Martin 1985; and Mele 1987a, 1987b. I thank Professor Mele for useful com-

ments on this section.
25. Mele 1987a, 122, Mele’s emphasis.
26. Ibid., 127.
27. Ibid., 125-26.
28. My point here could perhaps find some support in Neisser’s
(1988) distinctions between different sources of self-knowledge.
29. Girard’s claim 1s that all of the positions in the structures described

185 - Notes to Pages 101—127
by his theory of mimetic desire can be occupied by both men and women.
(He does not make the empirical claim, however, that in all cultures these

positions are occupied by men and women in equal proportions or with
equal facility). Girard has been called a sexist thinker who fails to notice
the essential differences between masculine and feminine desire. For example, see Kofman 1980, where we are told that Freud was not wrong
when he expressed his belief in a specifically female libidinal formation
associated with a concept of “narcissism.” Girard’s criticisms of Freud are
supposed to reveal a lack of attention to “the text of Freud.” Fortunately
for the important project known as feminism, it is not the case that all
. feminists must believe in narcissism and in an essential difference between
masculine and feminine desire; nor is it the case that Freudianism is the

only, or even the best, psychological framework for elaborating feminist
insights. It seems most prudent and interesting to recognize that it is presently an open question whether the theory of mimetic desire can provide
accurate descriptions of women’s—and men’s— motivational processes.
CHAPTER

FOUR

MIMESIS

AND

THE

ORIGIN

OF CULTURE

1. See also TH 287—89/312-13.
2. For a more detailed assessment, see Livingston 1992.
3. Girard 1982, chap. 2.
4. For background on the available data, see Hinde 1983; Lockard
1980; Potts 1984; Snowdon 1983; and Wilson 1980. Girard relies on

Montagu 1962 and Washburn 1962.
5. For an objection along these lines, see Lacoue-Labarthe 1978, 18.
6. Bandura 1973, 17-18.

7. Here I follow Toates 1986.
8. For the concept of “facilitation,” see Zajonc 1965.
9. Fora valuable critical discussion of this long tradition, see Dumouchel and Dupuy 1979.
10. Bandura 1973, 1983.
11. For background, see Cummins 1983.
12. See, e.g., Gowlett 1984.
13. Orléan 1985, 1989.
14. This is a problem clearly raised in Descombes 1985.
15. For discussions of such difficulties, see Bandura 1973; and Krebs

and Miller 1985.
16. For some of Girard’s remarks on Durkheim, see Girard 1978c,

162—63. For a more detailed discussion of the relations between Girard

186 - Notes to Fages 127-142
and Durkheim, see Livingston 1988a. Useful studies of Durkheim include Fenton, Reiner, and Hamnett 1984; LaCapra 1972; Lukes 1972;

Nisbet 1974; and Pickering 1984.
17. See esp. the key passage in Durkheim 1965, 239—40.
18. Here I follow Bandura 1986, 76.

19. Perhaps Girard himself leads us to the brink of this error in the
following phrase: “Up to now it was recognized that the rapid increase in
brain size, as well as other phenomena, required an interaction between

biological and cultural factors, but what has been missing is a model for
the organizing and driving factor in the process, a motor for this strange
machine. The victimage process gives us this motor” (TH 96/134). This 1s
a perfect example of the kind of mechanistic stance about which we should
remain skeptical until it has been supported by reference to a detailed,
operative model or “effective procedure.”
20. Bandura 1986, 15. For a useful definition of mechanical agency,
see ibid., 12ff.; see also Bandura 1989.

21. Gowlett 1984, 174—75. That future-oriented intentions and longterm planning are crucial features of human rationality is a point that has
been developed skillfully by Bratman (1987, 1988).
22. This and a number of important related points are made in Scubla
1988; see also Gans 1982.
23. For example, Orléan’s (1985, 1986b, 1989) analyses of the mi-

metic dynamics of financial markets suggest that a fundamental méconnaissance remains the operative condition of one of the most central institutions of the modern social order.
CHAPTER

FIVE

DESIRE,

VIOLENCE,

AND

REVENGE

1. Such an analysis is currently being pursued in a creative and informed manner by Cesareo Bandera.
2. Girard’s anthropology, then, bears many of the features discussed in
Hullen 1982.
3. Fora more general statement of the rationale behind such a literary
reading, see Livingston 1986, 1988b. David Lewis (1983) has couched
the key idea as follows: “We who have lived in the world for a while have
plenty of evidence, but we may not have learned as much from it as we
could have done. This evidence bears on a certain proposition. If only that
proposition is formulated, straightway [sic] it will be apparent that we
have very good evidence for it. If not, we will continue not to know it.

187 - Notes to Pages 142—157
Here, fiction can help us. If we are given a fiction such that the proposition
is obviously true in it, we are led to ask: and is it also true simpliciter? And
sometimes, when we have plenty of unappreciated evidence, to ask the
question is to know the answer. Then the author of the fiction has made a
discovery, and he gives his readers the means to make that same discovery
for themselves.”
4. For the Icelandic version, see Sveinsson 1954. For English transla-

tions, see Bayerschmidt and Hollander 1955 and Magnusson and Palsson
1960; and for a French translation, see Boyer 1987. All subsequent references will be first to the Icelandic version, Sveinsson 1954, and then to the

_ Penguin translation, Magnusson and Palsson 1960.
5. Byock 1982, 5, 27.
6. Miller 1983a, 1983b. See also L6nnroth 1976; Clover 1986; and
the prudent remarks in Clover 1985, 253-56.

7. For valuable indications about the sociocultural context of the production and reception of Nyala, see Byock 1988; Clover 1985, 1986;
Lénnroth 1976, 1980; Sgrensen 1977; and Turner 1985. For an impor-

tant discussion of the literary and aesthetic dimensions of the saga, see
Clover 1982.
8. For background and criticism of this view, see Anspach 1987.
9. Byock 1982, 28.
10. Lénnroth 1976, 165—66; cf. Foote 1984, 51.

11. A point ably documented by Byock (1982, 95). For other sources
on gender in the sagas, see Clover 1985.
12. For a detailed argument on the continuity of the feuding in question, see Miller 1983b, 321.

13. Byock 1982, 34—35.
14. For this example and other documentation, see Gurevich 1968,

130.
15. Byock 1982, 73.
16. Sveinsson 1954, chap. 36, p. 93; Magnusson and Palsson 1960,
p. 99. The Old West Norse text reads: “at rena mik morgu,” which is
sometimes translated as “steal my importance.”
17. Sorensen 1983.
18. For a similar approach, see Sveinsson 1971, 126—27.
19. Sveinsson 1954, chap. 9, pp. 29-30; Magnusson and Palsson

1960, p. 56.
20. Sveinsson 1954, chap. 10, p. 31; Magnusson and Palsson 1960,

p07.

188 - Notes to Pages 157-170
21. Egils saga Skalla-Grimssonar. For the Icelandic version, see Nordal
1933, chap. 40, p. 100; for the English translation, see Palsson and Edwards 1976, p. 94.
22. Miller 1983b, 322; see also Sgrensen 1983.

23. Boyer 1987, 1885 n. 1.

24. Heller 1958, 104.
25. For example, Heller tells us that “Bergthoras Leute sind nicht so
schwartz gezeichnet” (1958, 106).
26. Lonnroth 1976, 92. For a discussion of the theoretical implications of this pragmatic analysis of the saga, see Livingston n.d., b.
27. This is an interesting case in the history of the critical reception of
a text where moral and emotional judgments of a character have sharply
polarized critics and scholars. For background see Sveinsson 1971, 118.
28. Compare the two descriptions at Sveinsson 1954, chap. 9, p. 29,
and chap. 29, p. 57; at Magnusson and Palsson 1960, pp. 55 and 74.

29. Heller 1958, 104.
30. For similar remarks about the limits of explanatory claims that
should be made for the “mimetic mechanism” with specific reference to
the question of social change, see Livingston 1988a.
31. Sveinsson 1954, chap. 42, p. 109; Magnusson and Palsson 1960,
2.
CONCLUSION

1. For an overview of conceptions of rationality, see Livingston 199]a.
2. For example, Girard comments: “To stress the absence of conscious

choice in the selection of scapegoats, I speak of a ‘mechanism.’ But then I
am accused of being a ‘mechanist ” (1985a, 597).
3. See, e.g., the highly polemical remarks in Girard 1989.

Bibliography

Abravanel, Eugene, Eileen Levan-Goldschmidt, and Marguerite B.
Stevenson. 1976. “Action Imitation: The Early Phase of Infancy.”
Child Development 47:1032—44.
Abravanel, Eugene, and Ann D. Sigafoos. 1984. “Exploring the Presence
of Imitation during Early Infancy.” Child Development 55:381—92.
Achinstein, Peter. 1983. The Nature of Explanation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Aglietta, Michel, and André Orléan. 1982. La Violence de la monnaie.
Paris RUE.
Allison, Henry E. 1990. Kant’s Theory of Freedom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allport, Floyd H. 1920. “The Influence of the Group upon Association
and Thought.” Journal ofExperimental Psychology 3:159—82.
. 1924. Social Psychology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Allport, Gordon W. 1969. “The Historical Background of Modern Social
Psychology.” In Handbook of Soctal Psychology, 1:1—80. See Lindzey
and Aronson 1969.
Alston, William P. 1967. “Motives and Motivation.” In The Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, edited by Paul Edwards, 5:399—409. New York: Macmillan.
Anscombe, G. E. M. 1958. Intention. Oxford: Blackwell.

Anspach, Mark Rogin. 1987. “Penser la vengeance.” Esprit 11:103—11.
Aronfreed, Justin. 1969. “The Problem of Imitation.” In Advances in

Child Development and Behavior, 4:209—319. See Lipsitt and Reese
1969.
Astington, Janet W., Paul L. Harris, and David R. Olson, eds. 1988. De-

veloping Theortes ofMind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Audi, Robert. 1973. “The Concept of Wanting.” Philosophical Studtes
24:1-21.
. 1991. “Intention, Cognitive Commitment, and Planning.” Synthese 86:361—78.
Baier, Annette C. 1986. “The Ambiguous Limits of Desire.” In The Ways
of Desire, 39-61. See Marks 1986.
189

190 - Bibliography
Baker, Lynne Rudder. 1987. Saving Belief? A Critique of Physwalism.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bandura, Albert, ed. 1971. Psychological Modeling: Conflicting Theortes.
Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.
——. 1973. Aggression: A Social Learning Analysis. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

——..

1977. Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: PrenticeHall.
——.. 1983. “Psychological Mechanisms of Aggression.” In Aggresston,
1:1—40. See Geen and Donnerstein 1983.
. 1986. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive
Theory. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
. 1989. “Human Agency in Social Cognitive Theory.” American
Psychologist 44:1175—84.
Bandura, Albert, and Richard H. Walters. 1963. Social Learning and Personality Development. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Barwise, Jon, and John Perry. 1983. Situations and Attitudes. Cambridge,

——.

Mass.: MIT Press.
1985. “Shifting Situations and Shaken Attitudes: An Interview
with Barwise and Perry.” Lingusstics and Philosophy 8:105—61.

Bassoff, Bruce. 1986. “The Model as Obstacle: Kafka’s The Trial.” In To
Honor René Girard, 299-316. See Juilland 1986.

Bateson, Gregory. 1972. Steps to an Ecology ofMind. New York: Ballantine.
Baudelaire, Charles. 1961. Oeuvres completes. Paris: Gallimard.
Bavelas, Janet Beavin, Alex Black, Nicole Chovil, Charles R. Lemery, and

Jennifer Mullett. 1988. “Form and Function in Motor Mimicry:
Topographic Evidence that the Primary Function Is Communicative.” Human Communication Research 14:275—300.
Bayerschmidt, Carl F., and Lee M. Hollander, trans. 1955. Nyal’s Saga.
New York: NYU Press.
Bennett, Jonathan. 1988. Events and Their Names. Indianapolis: Hackett.

Berger, Seymour M. 1987. “Social Comparison, Modeling, and Perseverance.” In Social Comparison Processes, 209-34. See Suls and
Miller 1987.
Berman, Alan L. 1988. “Fictional Depiction of Suicide in Television Films

and Imitation Effects.” American Journal ofPsychiatry 145:982—86.
Bicchieri, Cristina. 1987. “Rationality and Predictability in Economics.”
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 38:501—13.
Bishop, John. 1989. Natural Agency: An Essay on the Causal Theory ofAction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

191 - Bibliography
Block, Ned, ed. 1980. Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Bloom, Lois, Lois Hood, and Patsy Lightbown. 1974. “Imitation in Language Development: If, When, and Why.” Cognitive Psychology

6:380—420.
Boér, Steven E., and William G. Lycan. 1986. Knowing Who. Cambridge,

Mass.: MIT Press.
Bolles, Robert C. 1967. Theory of Motivation. New York: Harper &
Row.
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel. 1982. Le Sujet freudien. Paris: Flammarion.
:
Translated by Catherine Porter, under the title The Freudian Subject.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988.
Boyer, Régis, ed. and trans. 1987. Sagas islandasses. Paris: Gallimard.
Brand, Myles. 1984. Intending and Acting: Toward a Naturalized Action
Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Brandt, Richard B., and Jaegwon Kim. 1963. “Wants as Explanations of
Actions.” Journal of Philosophy 60:425—35.
Bratman, Michael E. 1987. Intention, Plans, and Practical Reason. Cam-

bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
. 1988. “Intention and Personal Policies.” Report No. 88-118.
Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
. 1990. “Dretske’s Desires.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50:795—800.
Broughton, John M. 1986. “The Psychology, History, and Ideology of

the Self.” In Dialectics and Ideology in Psychology, 128—64. See Larsen

1986.
Bunge, Mario, and Rubén Ardila. 1987. Philosophy of Psychology. New
York: Springer.
Bussey, Kay, and David G. Perry. 1977. “Sharing Reinforcement Contingencies with a Model: A Social-Learning Analysis of Similarity
Effects in Imitation Research.” Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology 34:1168—76.
Butler, Judith P. 1987. Subjects ofDestre: Hegelian Reflections in TwentiethCentury France. New York: Columbia University Press.
Byock, Jesse L. 1982. Feud in the Icelandic Saga. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
—_ . 1988. Medieval Iceland: Society, Sagas, and Power. Berkeley and Los

Angeles: University of California Press.
Cherniak, Christopher. 1986. Minimal Rationality. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.

192 - Bibhography
Churchland, Paul. 1970. “The Logical Character of Action-Explanations.” Philosophical Review 79:214—36.
. 1981. “Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes.”
Journal of Philosophy 68:67—90.
. 1984. Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Cleland, Carol. 1991. “On the Individuation of Events.” Synthese 86:229—
54.
Clover, Carol J. 1982. The Medieval Saga. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
—. 1985. “Icelandic Family Sagas (Islendingaségur).” In Old NorseIcelandic Literature, 239—315. See Clover and Lindow 1985.

. 1986. “Hildigunnr’s Lament.” In Structure and Meaning tn Old
Norse Literature, 141—86. See Lindow, Lonnroth, and Weber 1986.
Clover, Carol J., and John Lindow, eds. 1985. Old Norse-Icelandic Litera-

ture:A Critical Guide. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cummins, Robert. 1983. The Nature of Psychological Explanation. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
. 1989. Meaning and Mental Representation. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Da Matta, Roberto. 1987. “The Quest for Citizenship in a Relational
Universe.”

In State and Society in Brazil,

307-35.

See Wirth,

Oliveira Nunes, and Bogenschild 1987.
Danto, Arthur C. 1985. Narration and Knowledge. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Davidson, Donald. 1980. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon.
. 1987. “Problems in the Explanation of Action.” In Metaphysics
and Morality, 35—49. See Pettit, Sylvan, and Norman 1987.

. 1990. “The Structure and Content of Truth.” Journal of Philosophy 87:279—328.
Davis, Wayne A. 1986. “The Two Senses of Desire.” In The Ways ofDesire,
63-82. See Marks 1986.
Deci, Edward L. 1975. Intrinsic Motivation. New York: Plenum.

. 1980. The Psychology of Self-Determination. Lexington, Mass.:
Lexington Books.
Deci, Edward L., and Richard M. Ryan. 1985. Intrinsic Motivation and

Self- Determination in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum.
Deguy, Michel, and Jean-Pierre Dupuy, eds. 1982. René Girard et le probléme du mal. Paris: Grasset.
Demos, Raphael. 1960. “Lying to Oneself.” Journal of Philosophy 57:
588-95.

193% Bibhograph y
Descombes, Vincent. 1985. “La Jungle ou le champ clos.” In Violence et
vérité, 549—57. See Dumouchel 1985.

Dretske, Fred. 1988. Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dumont, Louis. 1966. Homo /ierarchicus. Paris: Gallimard.

. 1977. Homo equalis. Paris: Gallimard.
. 1983. Essais sur Pindividualisme. Paris: Seuil.
Dumouchel, Paul, ed. 1985. Violence et vérité: collogue de Cérisy autour de

René Girard. Paris: Grasset.
, ed. 1988. Violence and Truth: On the Work of René Girard. London: Athlone; Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Dumouchel, Paul, and Jean-Pierre Dupuy. 1979. L’Enfer des choses: René
Girard et la logique de Péconomie. Paris: Seuil.
Dupuy, Jean-Pierre. 1982. “Mimésis et morphogénése.” In Ordres et désordres: enquéte sur un nouveau paradigme, 125-85. Paris: Seuil.
. 1986. “La Justice sociale introuvable.” Commentaire 9:213—22.

Durkheim, Emile. 1965. The Elementary Forms ofReligious Life. Translated
by Joseph Ward Swain. New York: Free Press.
Else, Gerald F. 1958. “‘Imitatiom’ in the Fifth Century.” Classical Philology
53:73—90; addendum, 245.
Elster, Jon. 1983. Sour Grapes: Studies in the Subversion of Rationality.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—.. 1986a. An Introduction to Karl Marx. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
, ed. 1986b. The Multiple Self. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Farrell, Daniel M. 1989. “Intention, Reason, and Action.” American Phil-

osophical Quarterly 26:283-95.
Fenton, Steve, Robert Reiner, and Iam Hamnett. 1984. Durkheim and

Modern Sociology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flanders, James P. 1968. “A Review of Research on Imitative Behavior.”

Psychological Bulletin 69:316—37.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1981. Representations: Philosophical Essays on the Foundations of Cognitive Science. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Foley, Robert, ed. 1984. Hominid Evolution and Community Ecology: Prehistoric Human Adaptation in Biological Perspective. London: Academic.
Foote, Peter G. 1984. Aurvandilsta: Norse Studies. Odense: Odense Uni-

versity Press.
Fouts, Gregory T., Deborah N. Waldner, and Malcolm W. Watson. 1976.

194 - Bibhography
“Effects of Being Imitated and Counterimitated on the Behavior of
Preschool Children.” Child Development 47:172—77.
Fox, Robin, ed. 1975. Biosocital Anthropology. New York: Wiley.
Frankfurt, Harry G. 1988. The Importance of What We Care About: Philosophical Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gans, Eric. 1977. Essais Westhétique paradoxale. Paris: Gallimard.
. 1981. The Origin of Language. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
. 1982. “Le Logos de René Girard.” In René Girard, 179-213. See
Deguy and Dupuy 1982.
——.. 1985. The End of Culture: Toward a Generative Anthropology. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Garcia, Eugene, Donald M. Baer, and Ira Firestone. 1971. “The Develop-

ment of Generalized Imitation within Topographically Determined
Boundaries.” Journal ofApplied Behavioral Analysis 4:101—12.
Geen, Russell G. 1978. “Some Effects of Observing Violence upon the
Behavior of the Observer.” In Progress in Experimental Personality
Research, 8:49—92. See Maher 1978.
Geen, Russell G., William W. Beatty, and Robert M. Arkin. 1984. Hu-

man Motivation: Phystological,
ton: Allyn & Bacon.

Behavioral, and Social Approaches. Bos-

Geen, Russell G., and Edward Donnerstein, eds. 1983. Aggression: The-

oretical and Empirical Views. 2 vols. London: Academic.
Gewirtz, Jacob L., and Karen C. Stingle. 1968. “The Learning of Generalized Imitation as the Basis for Identification.” Psychological Review
75:374-97.
Ginet, Carl. 1990. On Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Girard, René. 1961. Mensonge romantique et vérité romanesque. Paris:
Grasset. Translated by Yvonne Freccero, under the title Deceit, De-

stre, and the Novel. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1965.
——. 1963. Dostoierski: du double a Punité. Paris: Plon.
——.. 1972. La Violence et le sacré. Paris: Grasset. Translated by Patrick
Gregory, under the title Violence and the Sacred. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1977.

———.. 1976. Critique dans un souterrain. Lausanne: L’Age d@Homme.
. 1978a. “Delirium as System.” In “To Double Business Bound”: Essays on Literature, Mimesis, and Anthropology, 84—120. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
——.. 1978b. Des choses cachées depuis la fondation du monde. Paris:

195 - Bibliography
Grasset. Translated by Stephen Bann and Michael Metteer, under
the title Things Hidden since the Foundation of the World. London:
Athlone; Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987.
——.. 1978c. “Differentiation and Reciprocity in Lévi-Strauss and
Contemporary Theory.” In “Jo Double Business Bound,” 155—77.
See Girard 1978a.
. 1978d. “Interview.” Diacritics 8:31—54.
———.. 1978e. “Narcissism: The Freudian Myth Demythified by Proust.”
In Psychoanalysis, Creativity, and Literature, 293-311. See Roland
,
1978.
——.. 1979. “Myth and Ritual in Shakespeare: A Midsummer Night’s
Dream.” In Textual Strategies, 189-212. See Harari 1979.
. 1982. Le Bouc émissaire. Paris: Grasset. Translated by Yvonne
Freccero, under the title The Scapegoat. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1986.
——.. 1984a. “Disorder and Order in Mythology.” In Disorder and
Order, 80-97. See Livingston 1984.

. 1984b. “Hamlet’s Dull Revenge.” Stanford Literature Review
1:159-—200.
———. 1985a. “Le Meurtre fondateur dans la pensée de Nietzsche.” In
Violence et vérité, 597—613. See Dumouchel 1985.

. 1985b. “The Politics of Desire in Troilus and Cressida.” In Shakespeare and the Question of Theory, 188—209. See Parker and Hartman
1985.
.1985c. La Route antique des hommes pervers. Paris: Grasset. Translated by Yvonne Freccero, under the title Job: The Victim ofHis People. London: Athlone; Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987.
—. 1989. “Theory and Its Terrors.” In Limits of Theory, 225—54. See
Kavanagh 1989.
. 1991.A Theater ofEnvy: Shakespeare. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, Alvin I. 1970. A Theory of Human Action. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Goldmann, Lucien. 1961. “Marx, Lukacs, Girard et la sociologie du ro-

man.” Médiations 2:143—53.
Gould, Madelyn S., and David Shaffer. 1986. “The Impact of Suicide in
Television Movies: Evidence of Imitation.” New England Journal of
Medicine, 315, no. 11: 690—94.
Gowlett, John A. J. 1984. “Mental Abilities of Early Man: A Look at Some

Hard Evidence.” In Hominid Evolution, 167—92. See Foley 1984.

196 - Bibliography
Grusec, Joan E., and R. Abramovitch.

1982. “Imitation of Peers and

Adults in a Natural Setting: A Functional Analysis.” Child Development 53:636—42.
Grusec, Joan E., and Dale B. Brinker, Jr. 1972. “Reinforcement for Imita-

tion as a Social Learning Determinant with Implications for SexRole Development.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
21:149-58.
Guillaume, Paul. 1926. L’Imitation chez Venfant. Paris: Félix Alcan.
Gurevich, A. Y. 1968. “Wealth and Gift-Bestowal among the Ancient
Scandinavians.” Scandinavica 7:126—38.
Hamerton-Kelly, Robert G., ed. 1987. Violent Origins: Walter Burkert,
René Girard, and Jonathan Z. Smith on Ritual Killing and Cultural
Formation. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hamilton, Vernon. 1983. The Cognitive Structures and Processes of Human
Motivation and Personality. New York: Wiley.
Harari, Josué V., ed. 1979. Textual Strategies. Ithaca: Cornell University

Press.
Harré, Rom, David Clarke, and Nicola De Carlo. 1985. Motives and Mech-

anisms. London: Methuen.
Harrison, Ross, ed. 1979. Rational Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heil, John, and Alfred Mele. 1991. “Mental Causes.” American Philosophtcal Quarterly 28:61—70.
Heller, Rolf. 1958. Die literarische Darstellung der Frau in den Islindersagas. Halle: Max Niemeyer.
Hinde, Robert A. 1983. Primate Social Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer.
Hollander, Edwin P., and Raymond G. Hunt, eds. 1972. Classic Contribu-

tions to Social Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Huesmann, L. Rowell. 1988. “An Information Processing Model for the
Development of Aggression.” Aggressive Behavior 14:13—24.
Hullen, Jiirgen. 1982. Entfremdung und Versohnung als Grundstruktur der
Anthropologie. Munich: Karl Alber Freiburg.
Jackson, Frank, and Philip Pettit. 1990. “Causation in the Philosophy of

Mind.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50:195—214.
Jacoby, Susan. 1983. Wild Justice: The Evolution of Revenge. New York:
Harper & Row.
Jeffres, Leo W. 1986. Mass Media: Processes and Effects. Prospect Heights,

Ill.: Waveland.

197 - Bibhography
Johnsen, William. 1989. “Myth, Ritual, and Literature after Girard.” In
Literary Theory’s Future(s), 116—48. See Natoli 1989.

Johnson-Laird, Philip N. 1983. Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science
of Language, Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Juilland, Alphonse, ed. 1986. To Honor René Girard. Stanford French Re-

view 10.
Kauffman, James M., Mary Ellen Gordon, and Ahmad

Baker. 1978.

“Being Imitated: Persistence of an Effect.” Journal of Genetic Psychology 132:319—20.
~ Kavanagh, Thomas M.., ed. 1989. The Limits of Theory. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Kaye, Kenneth. 1982. The Mental and Social Life of Babies: How Parents
Create Persons. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kinzey, Warren G., ed. 1987. The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate
Models. Albany: SUNY Press.
Kluwe, Rainer H., and Gunnar Friedrichsen. 1985. “Mechanisms of Control and Regulation in Problem Solving.” In Action Control, 183—

218. See Kuhl and Beckmann 1985.
Kofman,

Sarah. 1980. “The Narcissistic Woman:

Freud and Girard.”

Duacritus 10:36—45.
Kojéve, Alexandre. 1947. Introduction a la lecture de Hegel. Paris: Gallimard.
Krebs, Dennis L., and Dale T. Miller. 1985. “Altruism and Aggression.”
In Handbook of Social Psychology, 2:1—71. See Lindzey and Aronson
1985.
Kuhl, Julius. 1986. “Motivation

and Information Processing:

A New

Look at Decision Making, Dynamic Change, and Action Control.”
In Handbook of Motivation and Cognition, 404—34. See Sorrentino
and Higgens 1986.
Kuhl, Julius, and Jiirgen Beckmann, eds. 1985. Action Control: From Cogmition to Behavior. Berlin: Springer.
Kuhn, Deanna. 1973. “Imitation Theory and Research from a Cognitive
Perspective.” Human Development 16:157—80.
LaCapra, Dominick. 1972. Emile Durkheim: Sociologist and Philosopher.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe. 1978. “Mimesis and Truth.” Dzacritics 8:10—
74.
——. 1980. “Diderot, le paradoxe et la mimésis.” Poétique 43:267-81.

198 - Bibhography
Larsen, Knud S., ed. 1986. Dialectics and Ideology in Psychology. Norwood,
N.J.: Ablex.
LePore, Ernest, and Brian McClaughlin, eds. 1985. Actions and Events:

Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewin, Kurt. 1935.A Dynamic Theory of Personality. New York: McGrawHill.
Lewis, David. 1983. Philosophical Papers. Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press.
. 1988. “Desire as Belief.” Mind 97:323—32.
Lindow, John, Lars Lonnroth, and Gerd Wolfgang Weber, eds. 1986.

Structure and Meaning in Old Norse Literature: New Approaches to
Textual Analysis and Literary Crituism. Odense: Odense University
Press.
Lindzey, Gardner, and Elliot Aronson, eds. 1969. The Handbook of Soctal
Psychology. 2d ed. 5 vols. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
. 1985. The Handbook of Social Psychology. 3d ed. 2 vols. New York:
Random House.
Lipsitt, Lewis P., and Hayne W. Reese, eds. 1969. Advances in Child Devel-

opment and Behavior. Vol. 4. New York: Academic.
Livingston, Paisley. 1979. “Comic Treatment: Moliére and the Farce of
Medicine.” Modern Language Notes 94:676—87.
——.. 1982. Ingmar Bergman and the Rituals ofArt. Ithaca and London:
Cornell University Press.
, ed. 1984. Disorder and Order: Proceedings of the Stanford International Symposium. Saratoga, Calif.: Anma Libri.
. 1986. “Girard and Literary Knowledge.” In To Honor René
Gtrard, 22\—36. See Juilland 1986.
. 1988a. “Demystification and History in Girard and Durkheim.”
In Violence and Truth, 113—33. See Dumouchel 1988.

. 1988b. Literary Knowledge: Humanistic Inquiry and the Philosophy
of Science. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
. 199]a. Literature and Rationality: Ideas ofAgency in Theory and
Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
. 1991b. “Le Retour au Sujet: Subjects, Agents, and Rationality.”
Stanford French Review 15:207—33.
——.. 1992. “Girard and the Origin of Culture.” In Understanding
Origins, 91-110. See Varela and Dupuy.
———.. N.d., a. “Convention and Literary Explanation.” In Rules and
Conventions, edited by Mette Hjort. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins

University Press. Forthcoming.

190° Bibliography
. N.d., b. “Writing Action: Davidson, Rationality, and Literary
Theory.” In Literary Theory after Davidson, edited by Reed Way
Dasenbrock. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
In press.
Lockard, John S., ed. 1980. The Evolution of

Human Social

Behaviour. New

York: Elsevier.
Locke, Don. 1982. “Beliefs, Desires, and Reasons for Action.” American

Philosophical Quarterly 14:241—49.
Lénnroth, Lars. 1976. Njals Saga: A Critical Introduction. Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press.
. 1980. “New Dimensions and Old Directions in Saga Research.”
Scandinavica 19:57—-61.
Lukes, Steven. 1972. Emile Durkheim: His Life and Work. New York:
Harper & Row, 1972.
McCann, Hugh J. 1991. “Settled Objectives and Rational Constraints.”
American Philosophical Quarterly 28:25—36.
McFall, Richard M., and Elizabeth C. McDonel. 1986. “The Continuing

Search for Units of Analysis in Psychology: Beyond Persons, Situations, and Their Interactions.” In Conceptual Foundations ofBehavioral Assessment, 201—41. See Nelson and Hayes 1986.
McKenna, Andrew J., ed. 1985. René Girard and Biblical Studtes. Semeia 33.

. 1987. “Supplement To Apocalypse: Girard and Derrida.” Paper
presented at Symposium on Origins, Stanford University, September.
McLaughlin, Brian P., and Amlie Oksenberg Rorty, eds. 1988. Perspectives
on Self-Deception. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Madsen, Karl B. 1974. Modern Theortes ofMotivation: AComparative Metascientific Study. New York: Wiley.
Magnusson, Magnus, and Hermann Palsson, trans. 1960. Nyjal’s Saga.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Maher, B. A., ed. 1978. Progress in Experimental Personality Research. Vol.
8. New York: Academic.
Marks, Joel, ed. 1986. The Ways ofDestre: New Essays in Philosophical Psychology on the Concept of Wanting. Chicago: Precedent.
Martin, Mike W., ed. 1985. Self-Deception and Self-Understanding: New
Essays in Philosophy and Psychology. Lawrence: University of Kansas
Press.
Maxwell, Mary. 1984. Human Evolution: A Philosophical Anthropology.
London: Croom Helm.

200 - Bibliography
Mele, Alfred R. 1987a. Irrationality: An Essay on Akrasia, Self-Deception,
and Self-Control. New York: Oxford University Press.
. 1987b. “Recent Work on Self-Deception.” American Philosophical
Quarterly 24:1-18.
. 1988. “Against a Belief/Desire Analysis of Intention.” Philosophia
18:239—42.
. 1990a. “Exciting Intentions.” Philosophical Studies 59:289—312.
——. 1990b. “Intending and Motivation: A Rejoinder.” Analysts 50:
194-97.
——. 1990c. “Irresistible Desires.” Nous 24:455—72.
——.. 199]. “Dretske’s Intricate Behavior.” Philosophical Papers 20:1—10.
——.. 1992. Springs ofAction. New York: Oxford University Press.
. N.d. “Akrasia, Self-Control, and Second-Order Desires.” Nous.

In press.
Meltzoff, Andrew N. 1988. “Imitation of Televised Models by Infants.”
Child Development 59:1221—29.
Mendola, Joseph. 1990. “Intending and Motivation.” Analysts 50:190—

93:
Merton, Robert K. 1949. Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe, Ill.:

Free Press.
Messer, Stanley B., Louis A. Sass, and Robert L. Woolfolk, eds. 1988.

Hermeneutics and Psychological Theory: Interpretive Perspectives on Personality, Psychotherapy, and Psychopathology. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press.
Miller, Neal E., and John Dollard. 1941. Social Learning and Imitation.

New Haven: Yale University Press.
Miller, Richard W. 1987. Fact and Method: Explanation, Confirmation, and
Reality in the Natural and Social Sciences. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Miller, William Ian. 1983a. “Choosing the Avenger: Some Aspects of the
Bloodfeud in Medieval Iceland and England.” Law and History Remew 1:159-—204.
. 1983b. “Justifying Skarphedinn: Of Pretext and Politics in the
Icelandic Bloodfeud.” Scandinavian Studies 55:316—44.
Mischel, Walter. 1968. Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Moi, Toril. 1982. “The Missing Mother: The Oedipal Rivalries of René
Girard.” Diacritus 12:21—32.
Montagu, M. F. Ashley, ed. 1962. Culture and the Evolution of Man. New

York: Oxford University Press.

201 - Bibliography
Morillo, Carlyn R. 1990. “The Reward Event and Motivation.” Journal
ofPhilosophy 87:169—86.
Morin, Edgar. 1957. Les Stars. Paris: Minuit.

Moser, Paul K., ed. 1990. Rationality in Action: Contemporary Approaches.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nagel, Thomas. 1979. Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Natoli, Joseph, ed. 1989. Literary Theory’s Future(s). Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Neisser, Ulric. 1988. “Five Kinds of Self-Knowledge.” Philosophical Psychology 1:35—59.
Nelson, Rosemery O., and Steven C. Hayes, eds. 1986. Conceptual Foundations ofBehavioral Assessment. New York: Guilford.
Nisbet, Robert. 1974. The Sociology of Emile Durkheim. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Nordal, Sigurdur, ed. 1933. Egils saga Skalla-Grimssonar. Vol. 2 of Islenzk
fornrit. Reykjavik: Hid islenzka fornritafélag.
Oliver, Peter R., and Ronald A. Hoppe. 1974. “Factors Effecting Non-

reinforced Imitation: The Model as a Source of Information or
Control.” Journal ofExperimental Child Psychology 17:383—-98.
Orléan, André. 1985. “Monnaie et spéculation mimétique.” In Violence et
vérité, 147—58. See Dumouchel 1985. Translated by Mark Anspach,
under the title “Money and Mimetic Speculation.” In Violence and
Truth, 101—12. See Dumouchel 1988.

. 1986a. “Mimétisme et anticipations rationelles: une perspective
keynésienne.” Recherches économiques de Louvain 52:45—66.
. 1986b. “La Théorie mimétique face aux phénoménes économiques.” In To Honor René Girard, 12\—34. See Juilland 1986.

———.. 1989. “Mimetic Contagion and Speculative Bubbles.” Theory and
Decision 27:63—-93.
Oughourlian, Jean-Michel. 1982. Un Mime nommeé desir: hystérie, transe,

possession, adorcisme. Paris: Grasset.
Ozer, Daniel J. 1986. Consistency in Personality: A Methodological Framework. Berlin: Springer.
PAlsson, Hermann, and Paul Edwards, trans. 1976. Egil’s Saga. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Parfit, Derek. 1986. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon.
Parker, Patricia, and Geoffrey Hartman, eds. 1985. Shakespeare and the

Question of Theory. London: Methuen.

202 - Bibliography
Parton, David A. 1976. “Learning to Imitate in Infancy.” Child Development 47:14—3]1.
Patterson, Sarah. 1990. “The Explanatory Role of Belief Ascriptions.”
Philosophical Studies 59:313-32.
Pears, David. 1984. Motivated Irrationality. Oxford: Clarendon.
Perry, David G., and Kay Bussey. 1979. “The Social Learning Theory of
Sex Differences: Imitation Is Alive and Well.” Journal ofPersonality
and Social Psychology 37:1699—1712.
. 1984. Social Development. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Perry, John, ed. 1975. Personal Identity. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Pervin, Lawrence A., and Michael Lewis, eds. 1978. Perspectives in Interac-

tional Psychology. New York: Plenum.
Pettit, Philip. 1987. “Humeans, Anti-Humeans, and Motivation.” Mind

96:530-33.
Pettit, Philip, and John McDowell, eds. 1986. Subject, Thought, and Con-

text. Oxford: Clarendon.
Pettit, Philip, and Huw Price. 1989. “Bare Functional Desire.” Analysis

49:162—69.
Pettit, Philip, and Michael Smith. 1990. “Backgrounding Desire.” Philosophical Review 94:565—92.
Pettit, Philip, Richard Sylvan, and Jean Norman, eds. 1987. Metaphysics
and Morality: Essays in Honor ofJ. J. C. Smart. Oxford: Blackwell.
Phillips, David P. 1974. “The Influence of Suggestion on Suicide: Substantive and Theoretical Implications of the Werther Effect.” American Sociological Review 39:340—54.
Piaget, Jean. 1968. La Formation du symbole chez enfant: imitation, jeu et
réve, image et représentation. 5th ed. Neutchatel, Switzerland: Delachaux et Niestlé.
Pickering, W. S. FE. 1984. Durkheim’s Sociology of Religion: Themes and
Theories. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Pippin, Robert. 1991. Modernism as a Philosophical Problem. Oxford: Blackwell.
Platts, Mark. 1986. “Desire and Action.” Nous 20:143—55.

Potts, Richard. 1984. “Hominid Hunters? Problems of Identifying the
Earliest Hunter/Gatherers.”

In Hominid Evolution,

129—66.

See

Foley 1984.
Poulson, Claire L., and Effie Kymissis. 1988. “Generalized Imitation in
Infants.” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 46:324—36.

203 - Bibhography
Powell, C. Thomas. 1990. Kant’s Theory of Self-Consciousness. Oxford:
Clarendon.
Price, Huw. 1989. “Defending ‘Desire-as-Belief’ ” Mind 98:119—27.
Proust, Marcel. 1954. A la recherche du temps perdu. 3 vols. Paris: Gallimard.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1960. Word and Olyect. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Richard, Mark. 1990. Propositional Attitudes: An Essay on Thoughts and
How We Ascribe Them. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roland, Alan, ed. 1978. Psychoanalysis, Creativity, and Literature. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Rosenbaum, Milton E., William C. Horne, and Douglas K. Chalmers.
1962. “Level of Self-Esteem and the Learning of Imitation and
Nonimitation.” Journal of Personality 30:147—56.
Rosenbaum, Milton E., and Irving F. Tucker. 1962. “The Competence of

the Model and the Learning of Imitation and Nonimitation.” Journal ofExperimental Psychology 63:183—90.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Lyman W. Porter, eds. 1983. Annual Remiew of
Psychology, vol. 34. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews.
Ross, Michael, and Garth J. O. Fletcher. 1985. “Attribution and Social

Perception.” In Handbook of Social Psychology, 2:73—122. See Lindzey and Aronson 1985.
Satinoff, Evelyn, and Philip Teitelbaum, eds. 1983. Motivation. New York:
Plenum.
Schiffer, Stephen. 1976. “A Paradox of Desire.” American Philosophical

Quarterly 13:195—203.
Schmidtke, A., and H. Hafner. 1988. “The Werther Effect after Television

Films: New Evidence for an Old Hypothesis.” Psychological Medicine 18:665—76.
Schoemaker, Paul J. H. 1982. “The Expected Utility Model: Its Variants,
Purposes, Evidence and Limitations.” Journal of Economic Litera-

ture 20:529-63.
Schunk, Dale H. 1987. “Peer Models and Children’s Behavioral Change.”

Review ofEducational Research 57:149—74.
Schwager, Raymund. 1978. Brauchen wir einen Siindenbock? Munich: Késel.
Scubla, Lucien. 1988. “The Christianity of René Girard and the Nature of
Religion.” In Violence and Truth, 160—78. See Dumouchel 1988.

Searle, John. 1983. Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

204 - Bibhography
—.

1990. “Consciousness, Explanatory Inversion, and Cognitive
Science.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13:585—642.
Smith, Michael. 1987. “The Humean Theory of Motivation.” Mind 96:
36-61.
Snowdon, Charles T. 1983. “Ethology, Comparative Psychology, and Animal Behavior.” In Annual Review of Psychology, 63—94. See Rosenzweig and Porter 1983.
Sorensen, Preben Meulengracht. 1977. Saga og samfund: En tndforing 1
oldislandsk litteratur. Copenhagen: Berlingske.
. 1983. The Unmanly Man: Concepts of Sexual Defamation in Early
Northern Society. Translated by Joan Turville-Petre. Odense: Odense
University Press.
Sorrentino, Richard M., and E. Tory Higgens, eds. 1986. Handbook of

Motivation and Cognition: Foundations of Social Behavior. New York:
Guilford.
Sousa, Ronald de. 1987. The Rationality of Emotion. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Speidel, Gisela E., and Keith E. Nelson, eds. 1989. The Many Faces of

Imitation n Language Learning. New York: Springer.
Stalnaker, Robert. 1987. Inquiry. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Stampe, Dennis W. 1987. “The Authority of Desire.” Philosophical Review
96:335-82.
Stendhal. 1952. Romans et nouvelles. 2 vols. Paris: Gallimard.
Suls, Jerry M., and Richard L. Miller, eds. 1987. Social Comparison Pro-

cesses: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives. London: Wiley.
Sveinsson, Einar Olafur, ed. 1954. Brennu-Njals saga. Vol. 12 of Islenzk
fornrit. Reykjavik: Hid islenzka fornritafélag.
1971. Njals saga: A Literary Masterpiece. Edited and translated by
Paul Schach. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Tarde, Gabrielle. 1895. Les Lots de Pimitation. Paris: Félix Alcan.

Thalberg, Irving. 1977. Enigmas ofAgency. New York: Humanities.
. 1985. “Questions about Motivational Strength.” In Actions and
Events, 88-103. See LePore and McClaughlin 1985.
Thelen, Mark H., Stephen J. Dollinger, and Karen D. Kirkland. 1979.
“Imitation and Response Uncertainty.” Journal of Genetic Psychology

135:139-52.
Thelen, Mark

H., Stephen J. Dollinger,

and Michael

C. Roberts.

1975. “On Being Imitated: Its Effects on Attraction and Reciprocal Imitation.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology

31:467-72.

205 - Bibliography
Thelen, Mark H., Nanette M. Frautschi, Peter A. Fehrenbach, and Karen

D. Kirkland. 1978. “Imitation in the Interest of Social Influence.”
Developmental Psychology 14:429—30.

Thelen, Mark H., and Jerry L. Fryrear. 1971. Effect of Observer and
Model Race on the Imitation of Standards of Self-Reward.” Developmental Psychology 5:133—35.
Thelen, Mark H., Jerry L. Fryrear, and David Rennie. 1971. “Delayed Im-

itation of Self-Reward Standards.” Journal ofExperimental Research
in Personality 5:317—22.
Thelen, Mark H., and Karen D. Kirkland. 1976. “On Status and Being
;
Imitated: Effects on Reciprocal Imitation and Attraction.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 33:691—97.
Thelen, Mark H., David J. Miller, Peter A. Fehrenbach, Nanette M. Fraut-

schi, and M. Daniel Fishbein. 1980. “Imitation during Play as a
Means of Social Influence.” Child Development 51:918—20.
Thelen, Mark H., Stephen C. Paul, Stephen J. Dollinger, and Michael C.

Roberts. 1978. “Response Uncertainty and Imitation: The Interactive Effects of Age and Task Options.” Journal ofResearch in Personality 12:370-—80.
Toates, Frederick M. 1986. Motivational Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Toates, Frederick M., and Timothy R. Halliday. 1980. Analysis ofMottvational Processes. New York: Academic.
Tugendhat, Ernst. 1986. Self-Consctousness and Self-Determination. Translated by Paul Stern. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Tuomela, Raimo. 1977. Human Action and Its Explanation: A Study on the
Philosophical Foundations of Psychology. Dordrecht: Reidel.
. 1984. A Theory of Social Action. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Tuomela, Raimo, and Gottfried Seebass, eds. 1985. Social Action. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Turner, Samuel M., and Rex Forehand. 1976. “Imitative Behavior as a
Function of Success-Failure and Radical Socioeconomic Factors.”
Journal ofApplied Social Psychology 6:40—47.
Turner, Victor. 1985. “An Anthropological Approach to the Icelandic
Saga.” In On the Edge of the Bush, 71-93. Tucson: University of
Arizona Press.
Varela, Francisco J., and Jean-Pierre Dupuy, eds. 1992. Understanding

Origins. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Velleman, J. David. 1989. Practical Reflection. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

206 - Bibliography
Vermazen, Bruce, and Merrill B. Hintikka, eds. 1985. Essays on Davidson:
Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon.
Wallace, R. Jay. 1990. “How to Argue about Practical Reason.” Mind
99:355-85.
Washburn, Sherwood L. 1962. “Tools and Human Evolution.” In Culture

and the Evolution ofMan, 13—19. See Montagu 1962.
Watson, Gary. 1975. “Free Agency.” Journal of Philosophy 72:205—20.
Webb, Eugene. 1988. Philosophers of Consciousness. Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
Weber, Max. 1968. Economy and Society. 2 vols. Edited by Guenther Roth
and Claus Wittich. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Weiner, Bernard. 1980. Human Motivation. New York: Holt, Rinehart &

Winston.
Whitehurts, Grover J., and Ross Vasta. 1975. “Is Language Acquired
through Imitation?” Journal ofPsycholinguistic Research 4:37—59.
Wilensky, Robert. 1983. Planning and Understanding: A Computational
Approach to Human Reasoning. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Wilkerson, T. E. 1986. “Desire, Belief, and Rational Action.” Ratio

28:114—32.
Wilson, George Macklin. 1989. The Intentionality of Human Action. Rev.
ed. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Wilson, Peter J. 1980. Man, the Promising Primate. New Haven: Yale Uni-

versity Press.
Wirth, John D., Edson de Oliveira Nunes, and Thomas E. Bogenschild,

eds. 1987. State and Society in Brazil: Continuity and Change. Boulder: Westview.
Wolf, Susan. 1990. Freedom within Reason. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wollheim, Richard. 1979. “Wish-fulfilment.” In Rational Action, 29—46.

See Harrison 1979.
Wright, Georg Henrik von. 1971. Explanation and Understanding. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Wyer, Robert S., and Thomas K. Srull. 1986. “Human Cognition in Its
Social Context.” Psychological Review 93:322—59.
Wyrwicka, Wanda. 1988. “Imitative Behavior: A Theoretical View.”
Pavlovian Journal ofBiological Science 23:125—3).
Zajonc, Robert B. 1965. “Social Facilitation.” Science 149:269—74.

Index

Acquisitive mimesis, 103, 107-12; and

~

scapegoat dynamics, 113—18,
120-27
Action theory, 13-24, 179n.17,

180n.28
Aggression: in genetic hypothesis,
108, 113-27; and mimetic desire,
135-37, 148-60; problem of defin-

ing, 122. See also Conflictual mimesis; Revenge
Anscombe, G.E.M., 19
Audi, Robert, 20

Davidson, Donald, 14, 15, 93
Desire: contents of, 46—49; definitions of, 19-20, 23, 26; as disposition, 18—19. See also Mimetic desire;
Motivation
Double mediation, 71—72; in Brennu-

Njals Saga, 150—55; cognitive constraints of, 80—87; internal vs. external, 72—73; minimal episode of,

74—75; and self-deception, 92—99
Dretske, Fred, 47—48
Dupuy, Jean-Pierre, xiii, 10
Durkheim, Emile, 127—29

Bandura, Albert, 40—41, 64, 76, 132
Bateson, Gregory, 62

Freud, Sigmund, xiv, 12, 89, 141

Baudelaire, Charles, 4

Belief: occurrent vs. dispositional, 29,
174—75. See also Cognitivism; Tutelary belief
Boér, Steven, 68—69
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel, 7

Boyer, Régis, 162
Brandt, Richard, 19—20

Brennu-Njals Saga, 142; contingency
in, 165—66; and double mediation,
150—55; and doubling, 162—64;
and mimetic mechanism, 164—69;
motivation of conflict in, 149,

158-60; sequence of feuding in,
143-48; and social influence,
155-58
Byock, Jesse, 143, 147, 149-50

Gans, Eric, xiv

Genetic hypothesis: concepts of mimesis in, 103—4, 106—9; and hominid
agency, 107—9, 131—33; problem of

continuity/discontinuity in,
130—33; and scapegoat dynamic,
104—7, 119-27
Girard, René: basic claims, xii—xiil;
and Durkheim, 127—29; emphasis
on revenge, 142; and feminism,
184—85n.29; and “fundamental an-

thropology,” 104; and intentionalist
psychology, 26—29; interactionist
approach, 60—62; and literature,
176; mechanistic claims, xiv—xv,
140, 172—76; philosophy of history,

xvii, 137—41; and psychoanalysis,
Clover, Carol, 143, 147

Cognitivism, 15—24
Conativism, 15—24
Conflictual mimesis, 126—27

12, 63, 77, 184—85n.29; sociohistorical assumptions, 73; stress on
desire, 25-26; theological claims,

xvii—xvili, 133-34, 138—39. See also

Genetic hypothesis; Mimetic desire

207

208

- Index

Gowlett, John, 132
Grice, Paul, 68

184—85n.29; emulative vs. imitative, 50—51; interpretations of,

Hegel, G.W.E., 7
Heller, Rolf, 143, 162, 163
Hominization. See Genetic hypothesis
Hume, David, 15

4-9; and link to specific actions,
173—74; and méconnaissance,
77—80; as quest for being, 5, 36,
and rivalry,
7—8; 49—54, 135-37,
146-50; as selective process, 2—3,

31-33; and social hierarchy,
Identification, 63—64

Imitation: and personal mediation,
64-67; in social psychology,
xv—xv1; utilitarian theory of,
41—42. See also Mimesis; Mimetic

desire
Kim, Jaegwon, 19—20
Kojéve, Alexandre, 7

Lewin, Kurt, 61
Lewis, David, 186—87
Locke, Don, 16
Locke, John, 68
Lonnroth, Lars, 143, 162
Lycan, William, 68—69
Méconnasssance, 76—80; and scape-

goating, 105-6
Mediation, internal vs. external,
54-57
Mediators, distinguished from models,
64-67
Mele, Alfred, 94-98
Metaphysical desire, 5, 36, 42, 100
Miller, William, 143
Mimesis: Girard’s notions of, 11; tra-

ditional understanding of, xii. See
also Acquisitive mimesis; Con-

flictual mimesis; Imitation; Mimetic
desire
Mimetic desire: and aggression,

43—46, 55-57, 79-80; and triangles, 99-102; and uncertainty,
5—6, 42, 79; and utilitarian imitation, 37, 40—42; See also Desire;

Double mediation; Imitation; Tute-

lary belief
Motivation: and acquisitive mimesis,
110-11; contrasted to cognition,

20-21
Motor mimicry, 109
Orléan, André, 6—7, 78, 119, 121, 124
Oughourlian, Jean-Michel, 3—4, 25
Pascal, Blaise, 4
Pears, David, 93
Proust, Marcel, 32, 85, 90—91

Psychological explanations: based on
attitudes, 13—14; basic ingredients
of, 15-24; fallibility of, 14—15; role

of cognitive terms in, 15—24
Quine, W.V.O., 18

Quinton, Anthony, 68
Reciprocal mediation. See Double
mediation

Revenge: and doubling, 162—64; in
Icelandic saga, 142—50; as mechanism, 164—69; and mimetic motivation, 150—62

135-37, 148—60; basic elements of,

Sartre, Jean-Paul, 5

57—59; contents or objects of,

Scapegoating, 104—6; and cognitive
error, 128—29; motivated by beliefs,
175
Scheler, Max, 5
Self-concept: 67—70
Self-deception: 93-99

49-54: and cultural and historical
factors, 43-46, 55-57, 79-80, 97,
103—4, 136—37; and cycles of revenge, 141—42, 148—60; and disap-

pointment, 88—91; as dynamic
structure, 9-10; and gender,

Situation semantics, 182n.7

209

- Index

Smith, Michael, 20
Stalnaker, Robert, 20
Tugendhat, Ernst, 68
Tutelary belief, 34—35; contents of,

39—46; diversity of, 38; and “entity

attribution,” 38—39; and méconnatssance, 78—80; two kinds of, 55—56
Weber, Max, 42, 71
Wilson, George, 20—21, 180—81

Designed by David denBoer
Composed by Brushwood Graphics, Inc.
in Galliard text and Bernhard Modern display.
Printed on 50-lb., Glatfelter offset, B-16,
and bound in Holliston Roxite

by Thomson-Shore, Inc.

iyaa

9

"

iN

J
s,s

3

=

PELLETIER

LIBRARY,

ALLEGHENY

COLLI

®

LSo0e iform
Livingston,
Paisley,
Models
of desire

1951-

PELLETIER

LIBRARY

ALLEGHENY

COLLEGE

